<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

<!ENTITY aolig      CDATA "ao"  -- ao-ligature -->
<!ENTITY AOlig      CDATA "AO"  -- AO-ligature -->
<!ENTITY oeacute    CDATA "oe"  -- oe-ligature with acute accent -->
<!ENTITY OEacute    CDATA "OE"  -- OE-ligature with acute accent -->
<!ENTITY aeacute    CDATA "ae"  -- ae-ligature with acute accent -->
<!ENTITY aoacute    CDATA "ao"  -- ao-ligature with acute accent -->
<!ENTITY Ocedil     CDATA "O"   -- O with cedille -->
<!ENTITY ocedil     CDATA "o"   -- o with cedille -->
<!ENTITY ecedil     CDATA "e"   -- e with cedille -->
<!ENTITY nmacr      CDATA "n"   -- n with macron -->
<!ENTITY mmacr      CDATA "m"   -- m with macron -->
<!ENTITY pmacr      CDATA "p"   -- p with macron -->
<!ENTITY hmacr      CDATA "h"   -- h with macron -->
<!ENTITY vmacr      CDATA "v"   -- v with macron -->
<!ENTITY rmacr      CDATA "r"   -- r with macron -->
<!ENTITY mtilde     CDATA "m"   -- m with tilde -->
<!ENTITY icaron     CDATA "i"   -- i with caron -->
<!ENTITY thornstrok CDATA "th"  -- thorn with stroke, U+A765 -->
<!ENTITY hstrok     CDATA "h"   -- h with stroke -->
<!ENTITY mring      CDATA "m"   -- m with ring above -->
<!ENTITY oogon      CDATA "o"   -- o with ogonek -->

<!ENTITY alpha      CDATA "a"   -- Greek letter alpha -->
<!ENTITY beta       CDATA "b"   -- Greek letter beta -->
<!ENTITY gamma      CDATA "g"   -- Greek letter gamma -->
<!ENTITY delta      CDATA "d"   -- Greek letter delta -->
<!ENTITY epsilon    CDATA "e"   -- Greek letter epsilon -->

<!ENTITY prime      CDATA "'"   -- single prime -->

<!ENTITY acomb      CDATA "a"   -- combining latin small letter a -->
<!ENTITY ocomb      CDATA "o"   -- combining latin small letter o -->
<!ENTITY rcomb      CDATA "r"   -- combining latin small letter r -->

<!ENTITY mmmacr     CDATA "mm"  -- combination mm with wide macron above (use wide macron U+035E) -->
<!ENTITY mnmacr     CDATA "mn"  -- combination mn with wide macron above (use wide macron U+035E) -->


]><TEI.2 lang=en-UK>
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title>Origines Islandicae: A Collection of the More Important Sagas and Other Native Writings Relating to the Settlement and Early History of Iceland (Volume 1 of 2)</title>
<author>Various</author>
<respStmt><resp>Translator</resp> <name key="Guthbrandur Vigfusson" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/76461696/">Guðbrandur Vigfússon (1827&ndash;1889)</name></respStmt>
<respStmt><resp>Translator</resp> <name key="Powell, Frederick York" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/8135243/">Frederick York Powell (1850&ndash;1904)</name></respStmt>
<respStmt><resp>Transcription</resp> <name>Jeroen Hellingman</name></respStmt>
</titleStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<pubPlace>Urbana, Illinois, USA.</pubPlace>
<idno type=LCCN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLW>#####</idno>
<idno type=OCLC>#####</idno>
<idno type=LibThing>#####</idno>
<idno type=PGclearance>20070925113134vigfusson</idno>
<idno type=PGDPProjectId>projectID46fc10757dd12</idno>
<idno type=epub-id>urn:uuid:d5799c56-e796-4f96-b548-a31b985e1f92</idno>
<idno type=PGnum>#####</idno>
<date>#####</date>
<availability>
<p>&availability.en;

<p>This eBook is produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at <xref url="http://www.pgdp.net/">www.pgdp.net</xref>.

</availability>
</publicationStmt>
<notesStmt>
    <note type="Description">#####<!--A short description of this document.--></note>
</notesStmt>
<sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author>Various</author>
<title>Origines Islandicae: A Collection of the More Important Sagas and Other Native Writings Relating to the Settlement and Early History of Iceland</title>
<date>1905</date>
</bibl>
</sourceDesc>
</fileDesc>
<encodingDesc>

<p>The original book placed the original text on the upper and the translation of the text on the lower half of each page. This digital edition places these side-by-side (in the HTML version). In the TEI master, they are placed sequentially, with the English following the Icelandic.

<p>Apparatus notes in the original where linked to the line-number on which the text they apply to starts. As these line-numbers are meaningless in this reformatted and re-flowable edition, the apparatus notes have been placed at the end of the fragment they apply to (in the TEI master). In a few cases, determining the exact boundary of the text a note applies to is hard and the location may be off a few words. In the HTML version, these have been rendered as end-notes.

<p>In the TEI master, special mark-up is used to indicate various elements in the text. All these elements have been indicated in the HTML version using colors.

<p><table>
<row role=label><cell>Element  <cell>TEI encoding <cell>Sample

<row><cell>Line number <cell><tt>&lt;ab type="lineNum">...&lt;/ab></tt>    <cell rend="class(lineNumColor)">34
<row><cell>Reference to line number <cell><tt>&lt;ab type="lineNumRef">...&lt;/ab></tt>    <cell rend="class(lineNumRefColor)">56
<row><cell>Paragraph number <cell><tt>&lt;ab type="parNum">...&lt;/ab></tt>    <cell rend="class(parNumColor)">12.34
<row><cell>Locator text (in critical apparatus) <cell><tt>&lt;ab type="textRef">...&lt;/ab></tt>    <cell rend="class(textRefColor)">abcd]
</table>

<p>This text uses Unicode characters (including combining diacritics) that are not supported in most standard fonts, such as the &AOlig; (AO-ligature), &aoacute; (ao-ligature with acute accent), &#x16C9; (Algiz rune), etc. To read this file, you may need to install either the freeSerif font provided by the <xref url="http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/freefont/">GNU project</xref> or the Doulos SIL font, provided by <xref url="http://software.sil.org/doulos/">SIL</xref>.

<p>End-of-line hyphenation has been removed, based on the occurence of unhyphenated words in the text. In Old-Icelandic, the end-of-line hyphen has been replaced by a soft-hyphen.

<p>Scans for this book are available from the Internet Archive. (Volume 1: copy <xref url="https://archive.org/details/originesislandic01gudb">1</xref>, <xref url="https://archive.org/details/originesislandic01guiala">2</xref>, <xref url="https://archive.org/details/originesislandi01vigfgoog">3</xref>; volume 2: copy <xref url="https://archive.org/details/originesislandic02gudb">1</xref>, <xref url="https://archive.org/details/originesislandi00vigfgoog">2</xref>, <xref url="https://archive.org/details/originesislandi02vigfgoog">3</xref>.)

</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
        <language id=en-UK>English (United Kingdom)</language>
        <language id=de>German</language>
        <language id=fr>French</language>
        <language id=la>Latin</language>
        <language id=is>Icelandic</language>
        <language id=is-1200>Icelandic (13th century)</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
        <keywords>
            <list>
                <item>#####</item>
            </list>
        </keywords>
    </textClass>
</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
    <list>
        <item>2014-12-26 Started.
    </list>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text rend="stylesheet(style/classic.css)">
<front id=frontmatter>
<div1 id=cover type=Cover>


<p><figure id=cover-image rend="image(images/new-cover.jpg)">
<figDesc>Newly Designed Front Cover.</figDesc>
</figure>



<div1 id=titlepage type=TitlePage>


<p><figure id=titlepage-image rend="image(images/titlepage.png)">
<figDesc>Original Title Page.</figDesc>
</figure>



<pb>
<titlePage>
<docTitle>
<titlePart>ORIGINES
ISLANDICAE</titlePart>

<titlePart type=sub>A COLLECTION OF THE MORE IMPORTANT SAGAS
AND OTHER NATIVE WRITINGS RELATING
TO THE SETTLEMENT AND EARLY
HISTORY OF ICELAND</titlePart>
</docTitle>


<byline>EDITED AND TRANSLATED

<lb>BY

<lb><docAuthor>GUDBRAND VIGFUSSON</docAuthor>

<lb>AND

<lb><docAuthor>F. YORK POWELL</docAuthor>
</byline>



<docImprint>VOL. I

<lb>OXFORD
<lb>AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
<lb><docDate>1905</docDate>
</docImprint>
</titlePage>


<pb>
<div1 id=imprint type=Imprint>


<p rend="align(center)">HENRY FROWDE, M.A.
<lb>PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
<lb>LONDON, EDINBURGH
<lb>NEW YORK AND TORONTO


<p rend="align(center)">PRINTED IN ENGLAND



<pb>
<div1 id=dedic type=Dedication lang=la>


<p rend="align(center)">HOC OPVS

<p rend="align(center)">GVDBRANDO VIGFVSSON
<lb>FREDERICO YORK POWELL

<p rend="align(center)">ET AMICITIA ET STVDIORVM COMMVNITATE CONIVNCTIS
<lb>LITTERARVM ISLANDICARVM PERITISSIMIS
<lb>DEDICANT DELEGATI PRELI
<lb>VNIV. OXON.
<lb>DESIDERII OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIVM




<pb n=v>
<div1 id=preface type=Preface>
<head>PREFATORY NOTE.</head>


<p>In these volumes the joint Editors, whose lamented death leaves the work without the final touches which they only could have given to it, aimed at bringing together, and making accessible to the English reader, all the important texts relating to the colonization and early history of Iceland. Even if these writings had no wider interest, there would still be much in them capable of attracting and retaining the attention of all who care for the study of ancient customs, or take pleasure in picturesque glimpses of the past. Among the mediaeval literatures of Europe that of Iceland is unrivalled in the profusion of detail with which the facts of ordinary life are recorded, and the clearness with which the individual character of numberless real persons stands out from the historic background. But in addition to these intrinsic merits, the historical materials here collected have a further claim to be favourably received by the English-speaking world. The Icelanders of the saga-age were not a secluded self-centred race; they were untiring in their desire to learn all that could be known of the lands round about them, and it is to their zeal for this knowledge, their sound historical sense, and their trained memories, that we owe much information regarding the <pb n=vi>British Isles themselves from the ninth to the thirteenth century. The contact of the Scandinavian peoples with the English race on the one hand, and the Gaelic on the other, has been an important factor in the subsequent history of Britain; and this is naturally a subject on which the Icelandic evidence, much of which is given in these pages, is of the highest value.

<p>In a collection of Icelandic texts like the present, no strict chronological order is possible: so rapid was the growth of a written literature during the twelfth century, and so uncertain is the authorship of almost every separate work, that in most cases only approximate dates can be assigned, and even these are often founded on evidence which may be fallacious. The arrangement which has been adopted is therefore based on the leading divisions into which the work naturally falls, beginning with the general and ending with the particular. First of all come those texts which give a comprehensive view of the early settlers, their original homes and family connexions in Norway or the Western Isles, the reasons and manner of their departure for Iceland, the place of their settlement there, and their most notable descendants. For all this the prime authority is the special history of the colonization, <hi lang=is>Landnámabóc</hi>, often no more than a bare catalogue of persons and places, but every now and then enlivening the long lists of names with short anecdotes or scraps of verse. No other work is so thoroughly representative of that unwearied interest in personal and local details which was characteristic of Icelanders in the past, <pb n=vii>and is by no means extinct at the present day. To this primary source some other materials of the same kind have been added by way of supplement, including the account of the Thorsness settlement from <hi lang=is>Eyrbyggja Saga</hi>, which is especially valuable for the information it gives as to the old heathen worship and religious ideas.

<p>In the Second Book an attempt is made to show under what customs and laws the new settlement started and continued to exist. Here the basis is Are&apos;s brief but all-important <hi lang=la>Libellus</hi> or <hi lang=is>Íslendingabóc</hi>, by which the section is linked to <hi lang=is>Landnáma</hi> on the one hand, and to <hi lang=is>Cristne Saga</hi> on the other. This little treatise, excerpted by Are himself from a longer work now lost, is remarkable not only for the amount of information packed into its few pages, but also for the scrupulous care with which the various statements are authenticated by reference to unimpeachable authorities. In the section on &lsquo;Primitive Laws and Customs&rsquo; many curious items have been brought together, in some of which the old-world air is obvious and of rare interest. Much of this naturally disappeared when Iceland gave up its old religion, a story briefly related by Are and told in fuller detail in <hi lang=is>Cristne Saga</hi>, with which the Third Book commences. In this and the texts which follow it the history is carried far beyond the early days of the settlement; but the period is important as that in which historical tradition assumed a written form. The lives of the bishops also contain much that is interesting, either in itself or by way of contrast with the stirring times of the tenth <pb n=viii>century. A slight contact with the British Isles is even found in the voyage of Bishop Godmund (pp. 613&ndash;15).

<p>It is probably in the second volume that the general reader will find the most attractive matter, and will obtain the clearest idea of the nature of Icelandic saga-writing. Here are given the stories of famous Icelanders of the tenth century, especially such parts of them as appear to have a real historic basis, or are valuable as records of early customs. In addition to these features, some of them possess literary merits which place them in the front rank of mediaeval literature. The completeness with which these biographies cover the greater portion of the island is in itself clear evidence of the zeal with which the whole Icelandic race combined to maintain a living knowledge of the past. The form, too, which the tradition has in many cases assumed, shows that to remarkable tenacity of memory there were united a creative imagination and an artistic sense of a very high order. Despite the similarity of form which obtains in these sagas, there is much diversity in tone and treatment, no less in the language than in the matter of the tale. Some, like <hi lang=is>Vatzdæla</hi>, consist merely of a succession of loosely connected episodes, often covering the lives of several generations; others, like <hi>Hrafnkels Saga</hi>, are neatly rounded tales, working to a natural but not always expected climax. Although some of the more famous sagas, such as Nial&apos;s and Gretti&apos;s, fall outside the scope of the present work, those which have been included are fully sufficient to <pb n=ix>show how fine an art that of saga-telling had become in Iceland.

<p>In the Fifth Book the centre of interest shifts from Iceland itself to its colony Greenland, and (in the Wineland Voyages) to the eastern coast of North America. The narratives relating to the latter are more generally known; the accounts of Greenland in the stories of Thorgils and Thormod will probably be new to most readers, and contain many curious glimpses of life in these outlying parts of the Scandinavian world.

<p>In the introductory matter prefixed to each text all important details relating to its origin, character, and history, have been duly noted and discussed. Much of this will be found to be either supplementary or corrective to the briefer accounts given in the &lsquo;Prolegomena&rsquo; to the Oxford edition of <hi>Sturlunga Saga</hi> (1878), to which the reader may turn for a general account of the older Icelandic literature.




<pb n=x>
<div1 id=toc type=Contents>
<head>CONTENTS.</head>


<list type=tocList>
<item>BOOK I.
<item>                                                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>PAGE</ab>
<item><ref target=bk1>SETTLEMENT AND SETTLERS</ref>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum>1</ab>

    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 1.</ab> <ref target=s1.1><hi rend=sc>Landnama-book</hi>, or the Book of Settlements</ref>              <ab type=tocPageNum>2</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 2.</ab> <ref target=s1.2>Early Genealogies from Sagas</ref>                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>237</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 3.</ab> <ref target=s1.3>The Thorsness Settlement</ref>                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>252</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 4.</ab> <ref target=s1.4>Mantissa</ref>                                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>266</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><ref target=s1.4.1>The Tale of Garmund Hell-skin</ref>                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>274</ab>
        </list>
    </list>

<item>BOOK II.
<item><ref target=bk2>THE OLD CONSTITUTION</ref>                                               <ab type=tocPageNum>278</ab>

    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 1.</ab> <ref target=s2.1><hi rend=sc>Libellus Islandorum</hi></ref>                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>279</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 2.</ab> <ref target=s2.2>Primitive Laws and Customs</ref>                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>307</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 3.</ab> <ref target=s2.3>Early Constitutional Law</ref>                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>334</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 4.</ab> <ref target=s2.4>Nial and the Fifth Court</ref>                                      <ab type=tocPageNum>363</ab>
    </list>


<item>BOOK III.
<item><ref target=bk3>CONVERSION AND EARLY CHURCH OF ICELAND</ref>                             <ab type=tocPageNum>369</ab>

    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 1.</ab> <ref target=s3.1><hi rend=sc>Cristne Saga</hi></ref>                                         <ab type=tocPageNum>370</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><ref target=s3.1.1>The Tale of Thorwald the Far-farer</ref>                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>407</ab>
        </list>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 2.</ab> <ref target=s3.2>Early Church Legends (Swade and the Poor; Thorhall Knop; the Tale of Thidrande)</ref>                                       <ab type=tocPageNum>413</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 3.</ab> <ref target=s3.3>The Lives of the First Seven Bishops of Scalholt</ref>              <ab type=tocPageNum>420</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><ref target=s3.3.1><hi rend=sc>Hungrvaca</hi></ref>                                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>425</ab>
        <item><ref target=s3.3.2><hi rend=sc>Þorláks Saga</hi></ref>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum>458</ab>
        <item><ref target=s3.3.3><hi rend=sc>Póls Saga</hi></ref>                                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>502</ab>
        </list>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 4.</ab> <ref target=s3.4>S. John of Holar&apos;s Life (<hi rend=sc>Ioans Saga</hi>)</ref>                 <ab type=tocPageNum>534</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 5.</ab> <ref target=s3.5>Second Life of Thorlac (<hi rend=sc>Oddaverja-Þáttr</hi>)</ref>             <ab type=tocPageNum>567</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 6.</ab> <ref target=s3.6>Fragments from Gunlaug&apos;s Life of S. John of Holar</ref>             <ab type=tocPageNum>591</ab>
    <pb n=xi><item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 7.</ab> <ref target=s3.7>Biographica Minora</ref>                                            <ab type=tocPageNum>594</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><ref target=s3.7.1>Tales of Bishop Islaf</ref>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum>595</ab>
        <item><ref target=s3.7.2>Of Bishop Gizor</ref>                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>596</ab>
        <item><ref target=s3.7.3>Bishop Magnus and King Gilchrist</ref>                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>596</ab>
        <item><ref target=s3.7.4>Of Cetil and Haflide</ref>                                               <ab type=tocPageNum>598</ab>
        <item><ref target=s3.7.5>The Election of Bishop Godmund of Holar</ref>                            <ab type=tocPageNum>601</ab>
        </list>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 8.</ab> <ref target=s3.8>Law Ecclesiastic</ref>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum>616</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>§ 9.</ab> <ref target=s3.9>Church Charters</ref>                                               <ab type=tocPageNum>624</ab>
    </list>


<item><ref target=later>The Later Genealogies appended to Landnáma-bóc</ref>                     <ab type=tocPageNum>639</ab>

<item><ref target=ix>Index of Persons</ref>                                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>643</ab>

<item><ref target=ixPlaces>Index of Places</ref>                                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>700</ab>
</list>


<divGen type=toc>


<pb n=xii>
<div1 id=errata type=Errata>
<head>CORRIGENDA.</head>


<p><table id=tableErrata rend="columns(2) font-size(small)">
<row><cell>PAGE <cell>
<row><cell>3,   <cell>l. 1 of the verse, <hi>for</hi> hallad <hi>read</hi> hallað <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 3 fr. bottom, <hi>delete</hi> has <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>13,  <cell>l. 8, <hi>for</hi> vet<hi>t</hi>r <hi>read</hi> n&oeacute;tr <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>15,  <cell>l. 10 fr. bottom, <hi>delete</hi> and <hi>after</hi> Night-fare <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>16.  <cell>The 2nd par. of the transl. belongs to the note on p. 14. <!-- OK, not marked --> In the 3rd par., <hi>for</hi> needed to journey <hi>read</hi> were intending to journey <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>21,  <cell>l. 3, <hi>delete</hi> til <hi>before</hi> mága <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>22,  <cell>l. 3, <hi>read</hi> vettrenn <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>25,  <cell>l. 14, <hi>delete</hi> es <hi>before</hi> hann <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>27,  <cell>l. 13 <hi>for</hi> bygðo <hi>read</hi> bygðu <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>32,  <cell>ll. 7 and 8 fr. bottom, East <hi>and</hi> under Eyfell <hi>are insertions not in the Icelandic text</hi> <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>33,  <cell>l. 7, <hi>read</hi> Kirkjo-bólstað <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>34,  <cell>l. 13, <hi>read</hi> Kirkjo-sand <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>36,  <cell>l. 15 of tr., <hi>for</hi> out of a feud with <hi>read</hi> through a false charge made by <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>42,  <cell>l. 9, <hi>after</hi> norðan <hi>insert</hi> Hvít-&aoacute; við sialfa <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>46,  <cell>l. 3, <hi>read</hi> B&aolig;lverk <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 11 of tr., <hi>for</hi> these <hi>read</hi> the <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>47,  <cell>l. 14, <hi>after</hi> Ornolfs-dals <hi>insert</hi> ár <!-- OK --><hi>and for</hi> -l&aolig;kjar <hi>read</hi> -l&oeacute;kjar <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>49,  <cell>l. 21, <hi>read</hi> Hárfagre <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>51,  <cell>l. 6, <hi>after</hi> Gliúfr-ár <hi>add</hi> ok Guf-ár <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 12, <hi>insert</hi> í <hi>before</hi> Crums-hólom <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>52,  <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Big-ness <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>53,  <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>place the comma after</hi> southward <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>54,  <cell>last line of tr., <hi>for</hi> open <hi>read</hi> iron <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>56,  <cell>l. 9 of tr., <hi>read</hi> they were both disabled in the battle, but Thorrid ... healed them, &amp;c. <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>58,  <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Lon Einar said that Hildigund&apos;s witchcraft had caused this <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 3 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> eight <hi>read</hi> six <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>59,  <cell>l. 5 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> is howed <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>63,  <cell>l. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Arn-kell the gode was called on to summon <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 4, <hi>read</hi> some stallions ... were <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>65,  <cell>l. 13, <hi>read</hi> þaðan <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 18, <hi>read</hi> v&aolig;llenn <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> stud-horses <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>last line, <hi>for</hi> Ari <hi>read</hi> An <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>69,  <cell>l. 6 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> Aulaf <hi>read</hi> Anlaf <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>73,  <cell>l. 4 of tr., the first winter <hi>belongs to the preceding paragraph</hi> <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>74,  <cell>par. 2 of tr., <hi>for</hi> won the victory <hi>read</hi> got the worst of it <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>79,  <cell>l. 5, <hi>after</hi> toko til <hi>add</hi> trúðo þeir því at þeir dæe í hólana <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 7 of tr., <hi>read</hi> when sacrifices began <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>84,  <cell>l. 6, <hi>after</hi> sonar <hi>insert</hi> Ingialdr ok Grane voro syner Óleifs Feilans <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>85,  <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> Mar <hi>read</hi> Men <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>86,  <cell>l. 8 of notes, <hi>for</hi> huns <hi>read</hi> hans
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 10 of notes, <hi>for</hi> vidu <hi>read</hi> viðu
<row><cell>88,  <cell>l. 6, <hi>read</hi> F&oeacute;dde
<row><cell>93,  <cell>l. 5 of tr. <hi>The text reads</hi> who made over an action for sheep-stealing against Thorarin Giallande to Ogmund
<row><cell>94,  <cell>l. 15 of tr., <hi>read</hi> that Icelanders said so, who had heard it told by Thorfin
<row><cell>95,  <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>read</hi> for almost every
<row><cell>96,  <cell>par. 2 of tr., <hi>insert at end</hi> their son was Sturla o&apos; Hvamm
<row><cell>97,  <cell>l. 21, <hi>for</hi> þetr <hi>read</hi> þeir
<row><cell>101, <cell>par. 4 of tr., <hi>for</hi> Wick <hi>read</hi> the Wicks
<row><cell>110, <cell>par. 2 of tr., <hi>for</hi> Bræce&apos;s son <hi>read</hi> Bræcer
<row><cell>114, <cell>l. 4, <hi>delete the comma after</hi> halft
<row><cell>119, <cell>l. 18, <hi>read</hi> Hermundar
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 2 of tr. <hi>The main text reads</hi> He came to Iceland because of the tyranny of king Harold, and took....
<row><cell>120, <cell>l. 10, <hi>for</hi> skyldr <hi>read</hi> skyldo
<row><cell>126, <cell>l. 3 fr. bottom, <hi>after</hi> to Iceland <hi>insert</hi> in a magical journey
<row><cell>127, <cell>l. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> it was where they were to settle
<row><cell>128, <cell>par. 5 of tr., <hi>read</hi> a she-bear and two white cubs
<row><cell>130, <cell>l. 8 of tr., <hi>read</hi> the Necks
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 9 of tr., <hi>omit</hi> that he could say
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 17 of tr., <hi>for</hi> fell down off <hi>read </hi>knocked down
<row><cell>135, <cell>l. 5, <hi>for</hi> sétt <hi>read</hi> sítt
<pb n=xiii><row><cell>137, <cell>par. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> porch-pillars, saying that <hi>he thought it folly to decide matters in that way, but said</hi> he would rather, &amp;c.
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>for</hi> it would turn out ill <hi>read</hi> it had (always) turned out ill
<row><cell>139, <cell>l. 3 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> wager <hi>read</hi> money
<row><cell>142, <cell>par. 2 of tr., <hi>delete</hi> in Norway
<row><cell>145, <cell>l. 20, <hi>for</hi> suman <hi>read</hi> sunnan
<row><cell>148, <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>insert</hi> king <hi>before</hi> Cearval
<row><cell>153, <cell>l. 20, <hi>read</hi> ófresker
<row><cell>155, <cell>l. 9, <hi>for</hi> er <hi>read</hi> or
<row><cell>157, <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>insert</hi> Then they rowed to the island
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 2 fr. bottom, his house, i.e. Hallstan&apos;s
<row><cell>165, <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>for</hi> mule <hi>read</hi> mull
<row><cell>167, <cell>par. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Cranheath, Thorgerd&apos;s fell, and the lower part of L.
<row><cell>171, <cell>l. 13, <hi>for</hi> eige <hi>read</hi> eiga
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 19, <hi>read</hi> Colla-vík
<row><cell>181, <cell>l. 18, <hi>for</hi> hafa <hi>read</hi> hafi
<row><cell>183, <cell>l. 13, <hi>read</hi> Sandvíkingar
<row><cell>185, <cell>last line, <hi>for</hi> mouth <hi>read</hi> month
<row><cell>191, <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>for</hi> priest <hi>read</hi> priestess
<row><cell>195, <cell>l. 5, <hi>read</hi> land-v&oeacute;tter
<row><cell>196, <cell>l. 7, <hi>read</hi> Leiðolfs-felle
<row><cell>201, <cell>l. 8, <hi>read</hi> Hilde-tannar
<row><cell>205, <cell>ll. 1 and 16, <hi>read</hi> H&oeacute;ngs
<row><cell>210, <cell>l. 20, <hi>read</hi> ófreskr
<row><cell>212, <cell>l. 2, <hi>read</hi> Þríhyrninge
<row><cell>214, <cell>l. 21, <hi>read</hi> lengst
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 22, <hi>for</hi> síft <hi>read</hi> sítt
<row><cell>215, <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Rang-river-fields
<row><cell>216, <cell>par. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> took the outer land
<row><cell>222, <cell>last line, <hi>read</hi> against Erne
<row><cell>223, <cell>l. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Thorgrim&apos;s property
<row><cell>225, <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>add</hi> Therefore he was called Bairn-carle
<row><cell>228, <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>delete</hi> the river <hi>before</hi> Axewater
<row><cell>241, <cell>l. 1, <hi>read</hi> á Mið-b&oeacute;num
<row><cell>247, <cell>l. 38, (?) <hi>read</hi> Oláfssonar
<row><cell>256, <cell>ll. 5&ndash;6 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> immediately that they drifted ... ship, they swept ..., and seemed
<row><cell>260, <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> with his children
<row><cell>268, <cell>l. 2 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> son, of Madderfields
<row><cell>269, <cell>l. 6 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Water-frith
<row><cell>274, <cell>l. 1, <hi>read</hi> Bókvíse
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 22 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> But Laf was borne on men&apos;s hands, i.e. was nursed carefully
<row><cell>276, <cell>l. 3, <hi>after</hi> tvá sono <hi>insert</hi> ok vóro svarter ok furðo lióter
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 11, <hi>read</hi> fóro á veiðe-skóg
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 8 of tr., <hi>for</hi> on a barge <hi>read</hi> on a war-levy
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 10, <hi>for</hi> quick to talk <hi>read</hi> clever of speech
<row><cell>286, <cell>1. 3, <hi>for</hi> whither <hi>read</hi> where
<row><cell>287, <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> one on the same subject
<row><cell>291, <cell>par. 4 of tr., <hi>ad fin.</hi>, <hi>read</hi> that there was one day more than the number of complete weeks....
<row><cell>293, <cell>par. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> or get redress for any injury ... and he said that various troubles would arise unless
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>read</hi> nor to Shaw-frith they that were west of it
<row><cell>294, <cell>last line, <hi>insert</hi> a Saxon by race
<row><cell>296, <cell>l. 2 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> it is said
<row><cell>297, <cell>l. 5 of tr., <hi>insert</hi> with half a mark of silver
<row><cell>300, <cell>l. 11 of tr., <hi>for</hi> then <hi>read</hi> there
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 7 of tr., <hi>read</hi> from the South, from Frankland
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 8 of tr., <hi>read</hi> four-and-twenty
<row><cell>303, <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>for</hi> untold <hi>read</hi> not reckoned
<row><cell>304, <cell>l. 11, <hi>for</hi> miðr <hi>read</hi> meirr
<row><cell>305, <cell>l. 7 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> And <hi>read</hi> Aud
<row><cell>309, <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>for</hi> sprinkled <hi>read</hi> smeared
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 4, <hi>for</hi> across <hi>read</hi> around
<row><cell>310, <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>for</hi> porch-pillars <hi>read</hi> high-seat pillars
<row><cell>313, <cell>l. 22, <hi>read</hi> NN <hi>for the second</hi> MM
<row><cell>314, <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> Now Earth upholds ... and Heaven bounds (<hi>or</hi> defends) it
<row><cell>315, <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> many <hi>read</hi> reconciled with money
<row><cell>319, <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>read</hi> under three earth-necklaces or strips
<row><cell>321, <cell>par. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> they are not bound to fight
<row><cell>323, <cell>l. 1, <hi>for</hi> eíðan <hi>read</hi> síðan
<row><cell>325, <cell>l. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> more than three
<row><cell>326, <cell>l. 5, <hi>read</hi> arens-horne
<row><cell>340, <cell>par. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> for that as for all
<row><cell>341, <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>add</hi> if they will
<row><cell>342, <cell>l. 19, <hi>read</hi> Álengr
<row><cell>343, <cell>ll. 4 ff., <hi>read</hi> what each one of them <pb n=xiv>holds to be the law ... what he holds to be the law, and with whom ... way; but if there be an equal number of law-court men on either side each party with their own view of the law, then, &amp;c.
<row><cell>344, <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> beg the godes
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> get him men belonging to another
<row><cell>346, <cell>§ 38, <hi>read</hi> falls short in any of his duties without necessity, and ... suit shall have half the fine, and
<row><cell>349, <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> named or settled
<row><cell>353, <cell>l. 19, <hi>for</hi> at <hi>read</hi> ef
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 10 of tr., <hi>read</hi> 9 p.m.
<row><cell>356, <cell>l. 2 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> or at his place, or so that his
<row><cell>357, <cell>ll. 2 and 6 of tr., <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;By this witness,&rsquo; he shall say
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 11 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> at the place of him whom
<row><cell>359, <cell>l. 11 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> lots at the court ... in that court
<row><cell>360, <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>read</hi> that another put a man&apos;s lot, &amp;c.
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 2 of tr. <hi>should run thus</hi>: If the man who has obtained by lot the first place is not ready, then the man who has got a later place shall ask permission to plead his case first; and he shall allow him. And if he do not allow him, then he must plead his own case [even] if he be not ready
<row><cell>366, <cell>l. 1, <hi>read</hi> H&aolig;skolldr lézk
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>for</hi> was <hi>read</hi> wears
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 5 fr. bottom, <hi>add</hi> and talk over the matter
<row><cell>370, <cell>l. 5 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> to which
<row><cell>379, <cell>l. 2 of tr., <hi>read</hi> who were present at the incident
<row><cell>380, <cell>l. 11 of tr., <hi>for</hi> beech <hi>read</hi> birch
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 18 of tr., <hi>delete</hi> a thatching of
<row><cell>384, <cell>l. 20, <hi>after</hi> hónom <hi>insert</hi> ok frændr hans verst
<row><cell>385, <cell>last line, <hi>insert</hi> and rated him, <hi>before</hi> and told him
<row><cell>386, <cell>last line, <hi>read</hi> &lsquo;Mighty must he be
<row><cell>388, <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> the East-friths
<row><cell>389, <cell>l. 2 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> Beck-bend
<row><cell>390, <cell>l. 11 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> South of C.
<row><cell>391, <cell>l. 10 of tr., <hi>for</hi> knife-edge <hi>read</hi> knife-point
<row><cell>392, <cell>l. 10 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> in that court was Sholto, &amp;c.
<row><cell>396, <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Some he threatened with death, and some with mutilation
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 12 of tr., <hi>read</hi> rather foolishly
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 3 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> worthy that Sholto should intercede for him
<row><cell>400, <cell>l. 3, <hi>delete</hi> til
<row><cell>401, <cell>l. 18, <hi>for</hi> es <hi>read</hi> ef
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 9 of tr., <hi>after</hi> Thorlaf <hi>insert</hi> on a charge of being a Christian
<row><cell>403, <cell>l. 6 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> by the eastern route
<row><cell>406, <cell>l. 3 of tr., <hi>delete</hi> in the West
<row><cell>407, <cell>l. 11, <hi>read</hi> in the original
<row><cell>408, <cell>l. 8, <hi>read</hi> weighed out of it
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 18 fr. bottom, <hi>after</hi> put to it <hi>insert</hi> And if any captives fell to his lot, he sent them home to their parents or relations, as also those whom he had ransomed with money
<row><cell>410, <cell>l. 26 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> good faith <hi>read</hi> courage
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 16 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> Withe-dale
<row><cell>411, <cell>§. 6, <hi>ad fin.</hi>, <hi>read</hi> observe or hold as a Christian
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 7 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> from the noise of the common
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 2 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> who hated him
<row><cell>414, <cell>l. 17, <hi>for</hi> saith <hi>read</hi> say
<row><cell>415, <cell>l. 13, <hi>read</hi> themselves by refusing to them the means of life
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 16 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> and if mercy and righteousness
<row><cell>416, <cell>l. 1, <hi>read</hi> agreed that it liked them well, all that he had spoken
<row><cell>     <cell>ll. 12&ndash;13, <hi>read</hi> all men were merry and very joyful that they had hearkened ... given them, and they received, &amp;c.
<row><cell>417, <cell>l. 26, <hi>read</hi> all our live stock
<row><cell>420, <cell>l. 11, <hi>read</hi> who ... who
<row><cell>425, <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> a little
<row><cell>426, <cell>l. 9 of tr., <hi>for</hi> cautiously <hi>read</hi> humbly
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 5 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> poorly here, and if they know anything truer (<hi>sc.</hi> to put in its place)
<row><cell>427, <cell>l. 13, <hi>for</hi> sví <hi>read</hi> sú
<row><cell>432, <cell>l. 5 of tr., <hi>read</hi> things which have been of great note, churches ... and small bells
<row><cell>440, <cell>l. 12, <hi>for</hi> kverjom <hi>read</hi> hverjom
<row><cell>441, <cell>l. 3, <hi>read</hi> sk&aolig;roligr
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> consecrated to
<row><cell>442, <cell>l. 11 fr. bottom, <hi>delete</hi> were <hi>after</hi> they
<pb n=xv><row><cell>442, <cell>l. 5 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> was as loving to him as if he had been his own son
<row><cell>444, <cell>l. 13, <hi>read</hi> 13. Mart es merkilegt
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 15, <hi>delete</hi> 13.
<row><cell>445, <cell>l. 8 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> of ready speech
<row><cell>446, <cell>l. 12, <hi>read</hi> margar
<row><cell>448, <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> that scarce can a parallel be found to it in Iceland
<row><cell>449, <cell>l. 9 of tr., <hi>read</hi> seven other priests perished there
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 6 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> St. Gereon&apos;s day
<row><cell>450, <cell>l. 8 fr. bottom, <hi>delete the second</hi> at
<row><cell>451, <cell>last line, <hi>read</hi> so that where he was, a decision might always be looked for ... there was need of
<row><cell>452, <cell>ll. 10 and 16, <hi>read</hi> af-vinno
<row><cell>453, <cell>l. 12 of tr., <hi>read</hi> in other neighbouring lands. And
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> the day of Vitus the martyr
<row><cell>454, <cell>l. 16, <hi>read</hi> ber-f&oeacute;ttr
<row><cell>455, <cell>l. 10 of tr., <hi>read</hi> leave that he might be permitted to give over
<row><cell>456, <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> in the Lenten Ember days. There
<row><cell>460, <cell>l. 6 of tr., <hi>for</hi> easy <hi>read</hi> watchful
<row><cell>462, <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> clad about anew with
<row><cell>463, <cell>l. 11, <hi>for</hi> <foreign lang=is>sem áðr</foreign> <hi>read</hi> <foreign lang=is>sem nú</foreign>
<row><cell>464, <cell>l. 11 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> men that in their way of life come near to that whereby ... arose and afterwards waxed great
<row><cell>465, <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>read</hi> has ... has
<row><cell>469, <cell>l. 7 of tr., <hi>read</hi> went forth for good
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 14 of tr., <hi>delete</hi> before
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 17 of tr., <hi>read</hi> where he was happiest
<row><cell>471, <cell>l. 19, <hi>for</hi> b&aolig;ðe <hi>read</hi> bæðe
<row><cell>472, <cell>l. 11 of tr., <hi>read</hi> lead to a sense of responsibility
<row><cell>473, <cell>l. 10 of tr., <hi>for</hi> three more <hi>read</hi> three men
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 11 of tr., <hi>for</hi> therefore <hi>read</hi> there for
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 14 of tr., <hi>read</hi> That bore fair ... them, that
<row><cell>474, <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> picked out, in order that other
<row><cell>475, <cell>l. 6 of tr., <hi>read</hi> need of some great supply. After
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 17 of tr., <hi>read</hi> both for the maintenance of them
<row><cell>476, <cell>l. 3 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> in great straits
<row><cell>478, <cell>l. 10 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> blessed bishop
<row><cell>479, <cell>l. 10 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> of the canonical life
<row><cell>480, <cell>l. 3 of tr., <hi>read</hi> with moderate rebukes
<row><cell>483, <cell>l. 9 of tr., <hi>read</hi> be writing holy books
<row><cell>484, <cell>l. 5, <hi>for</hi> er <hi>read</hi> or
<row><cell>485, <cell>l. 5 of tr., <hi>read</hi> them in their wholesome counsels
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 8, <hi>read</hi> from wrong desires
<row><cell>486, <cell>ll. 10&ndash;11, <hi>transpose</hi> þó tor-sótt vere <hi>to after</hi> van-stille, <hi>and so in translation</hi>
<row><cell>487, <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> abused <hi>read</hi> violated
<row><cell>488, <cell>l. 8 of tr., <hi>read</hi> to those of their doings that were right and good
<row><cell>489, <cell>l. 6 of tr., <hi>read</hi> that had taught them
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 2 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> put up with every thing that could be put up with and was not disgracefully unbecoming
<row><cell>495, <cell>l. 7 of tr., <hi>read</hi> free of my sentence
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 10 of tr., <hi>read</hi> would not mend their ways for me
<row><cell>496, <cell>l. 7 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> few that could
<row><cell>498, <cell>l. 5 of tr., <hi>read</hi> he tried to turn
<row><cell>501, <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> minor orders
<row><cell>511, <cell>l. 8 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> and two to ring together in the upper part of the church (i.e. two sacring bells in the choir)
<row><cell>512, <cell>l. 8 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> that he was not very anxious to promote the canonization of ... Thorlac. But ... wished to requite God for the glory that he had let come about ... happened before
<row><cell>513, <cell>l. 6 of tr., <hi>read</hi> Thor-wald
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 11 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> Cetil his son
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> a fast of a day and a night (i.e. it was to be one of the greater festivals which have a vigil before them)
<row><cell>514, <cell>last line, <hi>delete</hi> made ready
<row><cell>515, <cell>l. 8 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> the East-friths
<row><cell>516, <cell>l. 5 of tr., <hi>read</hi> well, that very summer. But
<row><cell>517, <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> the East-friths
<row><cell>518, <cell>par. 3 of tr., <hi>read</hi> told above, though little in comparison with the material that there is
<row><cell>519, <cell>l. 8 of tr., <hi>read</hi> weight of meal
<row><cell>520, <cell>l. 5 of tr., <hi>read</hi> on thee, Halla
<pb n=xvi><row><cell>521, <cell>l. 6 of tr., <hi>for</hi> they foundered <hi>read</hi> a squall caught them
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 12 of tr., <hi>read</hi> that had the courage to help them
<row><cell>522, <cell>l. 3 of tr., <hi>read</hi> to cheer others up
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 5 of tr., <hi>read</hi> the person
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 11 of tr., <hi>read</hi> the Invention
<row><cell>523, <cell>l. 6 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> doings as it is good for all to imitate
<row><cell>524, <cell>l. 5 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> else, the like of which had never been before
<row><cell>525, <cell>l. 8 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> penance, as a warning to those who were involved in the matter, or had made themselves liable to his ban
<row><cell>526, <cell>l. 14 of tr., <hi>for</hi> ..., <hi>read</hi> compensations.
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 21 of tr., <hi>after</hi> kinsmen <hi>insert</hi> who survived
<row><cell>527, <cell>l. 10 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> in other lands
<row><cell>528, <cell>l. 21, <hi>for</hi> en þau <hi>read</hi> ef þau
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 9 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> Thore the priest
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> carved tusk-ivory for it excellently well
<row><cell>529, <cell>l. 3 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> all Saints and for help
<row><cell>530, <cell>l. 9, <hi>for</hi> í átte <hi>read</hi> iátte
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 21, <hi>read</hi> róðra
<row><cell>532, <cell>l. 24, <hi>for</hi> creinom <hi>read</hi> hreinom
<row><cell>533, <cell>l. 21, <hi>for</hi> fa- <hi>read</hi> fá-
<row><cell>536, <cell>last line, <hi>read</hi> who considered what manner of countenance he had
<row><cell>538, <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <!-- Action? -->that was adorned with many virtues
<row><cell>540, <cell>l. 4, <hi>read</hi> Ioane
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 11, <hi>for</hi> ok <hi>read</hi> ek
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>read</hi> by his own good behaviour
<row><cell>555, <cell>l. 16 of tr., <hi>for</hi> hourly <hi>read</hi> so zealously
<row><cell>556, <cell>l. 4 of tr., <hi>read</hi> whom he had smitten
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> that the one did not conform to the other
<row><cell>557, <cell>l. 7 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> Thor-kel
<row><cell>558, <cell>l. 5 of tr., <hi>for</hi> Monday <hi>read</hi> Thursday
<row><cell>565, <cell>l. 2, <hi>read</hi> mæla.
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 19, <hi>read</hi> byscops
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> 54
<row><cell>566, <cell>l. 7, <hi>read</hi> bararnar
<row><cell>571, <cell>l. 12 of tr., <hi>read</hi> by the bishops
<row><cell>573, <cell>l. 6 fr. bottom, <hi>for</hi> one mind <hi>read</hi> his counsel
<row><cell>577, <cell>l. 8 of tr., <hi>read</hi> his father
<row><cell>579, <cell>l. 1, <hi>for</hi> ór <hi>read</hi> er
<row><cell>580, <cell>l. 1 of tr., <hi>read</hi> give her in marriage
<row><cell>584, <cell>l. 8 of tr., <hi>read</hi> riding up (lit. from below)
<row><cell>585, <cell>l. 4 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> to strike with it
<row><cell>587, <cell>l. 3, <hi>for</hi> frá <hi>read</hi> til
<row><cell>588, <cell>l. 1, <hi>read</hi> ætte
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 8, <hi>read</hi> sekezt
<row><cell>594, <cell>l. 7 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> p. 149.
<row><cell>595, <cell>l. 16 fr. bottom, <hi>read</hi> we will do thus
<row><cell>596, <cell>ll. 15&ndash;16, <hi>read</hi> go after them
<row><cell>597, <cell>ll. 13, 15, <hi>read</hi> h&oeacute;gyndet
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 18, <hi>read</hi> fát&oeacute;com
<row><cell>598, <cell>l. 16, <hi>read</hi> by law, without a battle
<row><cell>599, <cell>par. 2, l. 4, <hi>read</hi> their own booths and awnings
<row><cell>     <cell>par. 3, 1. 6, <hi>read</hi> holiday for that
<row><cell>600, <cell>l. 15, <hi>read</hi> therefore; and I refused the boot. And then I bethought me ... happened to me; and I saw
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 29, <hi>read</hi> chatter
<row><cell>606, <cell>l. 10, <hi>read</hi> to the East Friths
<row><cell>     <cell>last line, <hi>read</hi> men&apos;s
<row><cell>608, <cell>l. 15, <hi>read</hi> could not conceive it, and this high house must betoken
<row><cell>637, <cell>par. 6, <hi>read</hi> Einar&apos;s answer was that Thord his father&apos;s father [grand-father] let build
<row><cell>639, <cell>par. 5, <hi>for</hi> Iungerd <hi>read</hi> Irongerd
<row><cell>     <cell>l. 12, <hi>for</hi> átit <hi>read</hi> átti
<row><cell>640, <cell>ll. 15, 17, <hi>for</hi> IV <hi>read</hi> V
</table>





<pb id=pb1 n=1>
</front>
<body>
<div0 type=Book id=bk1 n=I>
<head type=label>BOOK I.</head>

<head>SETTLEMENT AND SETTLERS.</head>


<p>This Book gives the history of the Settlement of Iceland put down by Are the historian and his contemporaries, the fathers of old Northern prose history, from oral tradition, and from genealogies treasured in family remembrance.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 1.</hi> Are&apos;s <hi>Landnama-book</hi>, the Book of Settlements and Generations, the foundation of all exact history, political or social, of the North.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 2.</hi> <hi>Genealogies</hi> of the Settlers and their Kin drawn from other sources than Are&apos;s Works, and preserved to us in Nial&apos;s Saga and other Sagas.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 3.</hi> An early account of the <hi>Settlement of the West</hi>, now found heading the <hi>Eyrbyggia Saga</hi>, but going back to Are.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 4.</hi> Early notes and memoranda (also going back to Are), known in modern times as <hi>Mantissa</hi>; with a tradition relating to one of the early settlers, now found at the head of Sturlunga Saga.

<p>In this Book therefore lies the fountain-head of Icelandic history. And more than this, it contains early original authorities for all those varied phenomena of Scandinavian exodus from Norway, through the Western Isles to Iceland, of which we have so little other written record. It also gives much matter concerning early North-British and Norwegian history.



<pb id=pb2 n=2>
<div1 type=Section n=1 id=s1.1>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 1.</ab> LANDNAMA-BOOK
OR
THE BOOK OF SETTLEMENTS.</head>

<p>Nothing of the work of Are (born 1067, died 1148) has reached us in his own hand or in a contemporary MS., and his Landnama-book is known to us in two 13th-century recensions, one in the hand of Lawman Hawk (born c. 1260, died 1334), compiled from two books, as he tells us; one of Lawman Styrme (born c. 1170, died 1245); and one of Lawman Sturla (born 1214, died 1284).

<p>Hawk&apos;s autograph MS., AM. 544, has reached us, though in a tattered and imperfect shape; however, a copy of it, by John Erlendsson, AM. 105, fol., when in a better condition, exists. Sturla&apos;s autograph has perished, but John Erlendsson made a transcript of a copy of it also, AM. 107, fol. Both transcripts were made about the middle of the 17th century. Styrme&apos;s-book has perished; we can, however, get exactly at its contents from Hawk&apos;s compilation.

<p>The present text is based on <hi rend=sc>Hawk&apos;s-book</hi>, marked H and Cd, and vell. (especially when spelling is in question): the autograph vellum being used wherever it exists, and elsewhere John&apos;s copy. H&ast; refers to the three leaves lost when John&apos;s copy was taken, but, as we have discovered, existing in part (a part of one leaf at least, pp. 85, 86) when the Mela-book abridgment, below mentioned, was taken, and preserved in brief in that MS.

<p><hi rend=sc>Sturla&apos;s-book</hi>, the next authority, is marked S, but S&ast; refers to bits scattered through the Tryggvason&apos;s Lives, Grette&apos;s Saga, and other works which are taken from the Sturla text; they mostly present an inferior text.

<p>A short abridgment, of the later part of the 13th century by the so-called Mela-menn, of Landnama-book has reached us. Only one vellum fold in a 15th-century MS., containing part of Landnama, is extant in a poor state; the rest survives in a confused compilation by priest Thord of Hitardale (c. 1640), taken principally from Mela-book (which he cites as &lsquo;Landnama&rsquo;) and, secondly, from &lsquo;Hawk&apos;s-book,&rsquo; and more sparingly from Sturla&apos;s-book (by him cited as &lsquo;another book&rsquo;), and from other Sagas preserved in the Mela-book volume. The <hi rend=sc>Mela-book</hi> (the vell. fragment) we mark M; the Thord compilation (his own autograph) M&ast;.

<pb id=pb3 n=3><p>As to the history of these MSS. Arne has left several memoranda. In AM. 105, John Erlendsson&apos;s copy H, his slips run: &lsquo;This is that kind of Landnama-book which Biorn o&apos; Scardsa in his compilation of the Landnamas calls <hi>Hawk&apos;s-book</hi>.&rsquo; And, &lsquo;This Landnama-book and Christni Saga Sir Halldor Torfason of By in Floe lent me in 1704; in 1706 I bought the book of Thurid Sæmund&apos;s daughter, so that it is now mine.&rsquo;

<p>And in AM. 107, Sturla&apos;s-book, his slips tell, &lsquo;This is that kind of Landnama-book that Biorn o&apos; Scardsa in his compilation of the Landnamas calls <hi>Landnama</hi>.&rsquo; And, &lsquo;This Landnama Sir Halldor Torfason of By in Floe lent me in 1704, in 1706 I bought the book of Thurid Sæmund&apos;s daughter, so that it is now mine.&rsquo;

<p>As to the copies of M, in AM. 106, fol., he writes: &lsquo;This Landnama I got from Sir Thord Johnsson of Stade-stead.&rsquo; And in AM. 112, which is a leaf for leaf and page for page copy of AM. 106, only twelve rotten leaves left (ending in II. <hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 9), there is a scrap of paper slipped in, on which in a handwriting of 1700 stands the contents of the decayed parts supplied from 106. Of AM. 112, fol., Arne says, &lsquo;I got this in Sowerby in Keelness in 1705.&rsquo;

<p>The Landnama part of Hawk&apos;s-book is first known, since the revival of letters in Iceland, to have been owned by Are Magnusson of Ogr and Waterfirth in the north-west peninsula of Iceland.

<p>This Are Magnusson of Ogr came of a gentle family, members of which have been men of note in Iceland. He died in 1654 at a very high age. It is told of him that he was &lsquo;a head taller than any man at the Moot.&rsquo; We might guess that Hawk&apos;s-book was a kind of heir-loom in his family, and it seems certainly to have belonged to his father Magnus (died 1591) before him. Magnus was a poet and a politician in his day. His poems&mdash;Pontus Rímur and Rollant Rímur&mdash;were thought well of by his fellows. There is a verse which runs&mdash;


<lg lang=is type=Group>
    <l>Hefir nú lýða hials um rann <corr resp=errata sic=hallad>hallað</corr> kvæða bramle
    <l>Miúkar síðan mærðir spann Magnus Jónsson gamle,
</lg>


<p rend=noindent>and laments the decay of song in the West since Magnus spun his sweet lines. Magnus, in 1581, enacted a law in his district for the arming of the Icelandic farmers; every householder to keep weapons of such and such kind for the defence of the land against pirates, and fires were to be kindled as signals of the foe&apos;s approach, &lsquo;the smoke of the fires rising up and being easily seen from place to place,&rsquo; the wording of the passage referring to these beacons being evidently borrowed from a passage of the Landnama as it is in Hawk&apos;s-book (Book V. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 2). How it came to Magnus, a North-country man by descent, we know not; but one might guess, as Mr. Sigurdsson has done, that it was through his wife, the heiress Ragnheid, Eggert&apos;s daughter, a West-country woman. But whether it <corr resp=errata sic="has "></corr>passed from Hawk&apos;s family into hers we know not, for of actual record of the book from 1334, when Hawk died, to 1591, when Magnus died, there is none. The last remains of <pb id=pb4 n=4>Icelandic medieval culture and its family libraries and gentle life are to be sought for in Magnus&apos; days round the knot of old Western farms, Ogr, Wigr, Water-frith, By o&apos; Red-sand, Flatey, Reykhólar, Scard, Stadarhól,&mdash;all family estates. Thus Magnus the Poet lived in Ogr, but died in By o&apos; Red-sand.

<p>The name <hi>Hawk&apos;s-book</hi> (AM. 544) has a double use; sometimes it refers to the whole vellum, with its heterogeneous contents; and more often to that part of it which contains the copy of the Landnama-book, and this name I believe begins with that eccentric and ill-fated scholar John the Learned, to whom Are Magnusson lent it. Are also lent it to Arngrim the Learned, who used it for his <hi lang=la>Specimen Islandiae Historicum</hi>, written in Iceland in 1633, but published at Amsterdam in 1643. About 1640 it passed into Bishop Thorlac&apos;s hands, who gave it to Biorn o&apos; Scardsa for his compilation of Landnama-book, which has been for a century and a half the textus receptus. Biorn&apos;s compilation we put down to 1640&ndash;1643, for Apr. 29, 1645, he speaks of it as a work of the past. See Prolog. to Sturl. Saga, p. cxliii, foot-note 2.

<p>Of Biorn&apos;s work there are many paper copies, AM. 104, 109, 110, 108, fol., and several others. The first of these by Asgeir Jonsson is, I believe, made from Biorn&apos;s own now lost autograph, year 1643. The second, 109, is written by John Gizurson (died 1648), and it has the Marginalia, etc., which Asgeir keeps in their places at the side of the page, incorporated into the body of the text. There is also a parchment copy, New. Roy. Lib. 1147, of about 1650. AM. 111 is an abridgment of no value, chiefly from H. Biorn&apos;s method of work is best shown by a single instance, which at the same time may serve as a useful test, by which the reader may, without further trouble, detect a copy printed or written of a Landnama text. In Hawk&apos;s-book (I. <hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 9) Ingolf is said to have come to a desert land, &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>at auðo lande</foreign>;&rsquo; Sturla&apos;s-book reads &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>að óbygðu lande</foreign>,&rsquo; to an uninhabited land. But Biorn, in framing his text after the model of the old Gospel Harmonies, carefully puts in both epithets, and his compound text runs &lsquo;at auðu landi óbygðu,&rsquo; to a desert land uninhabited; for he did not perceive that in Are&apos;s style the one epithet would exclude the other, and the taste of his own day for the doubled epithet made it sound well enough to his ear.

<p>Thord Jonsson, the priest of Heat-dale (ordained 1634 and died 1670), is the other person that used the book for his compilation. His compilation, we hold, preceded that of Biorn by a few years, for a part at least of one of the missing leaves (leaf 14) is seen to have been used by him, whilst in Biorn&apos;s text no traces of it are seen; hence we date it 1635&ndash;1640. From Bishop Thorlac it passed into Bishop Bryniolf&apos;s hands; it was he that got John Erlendsson to make the copy AM. 105.

<p>After the Bishop&apos;s death the Hawk&apos;s-book fell into vandals&apos; hands, and was pulled to pieces. The Landnama and Christni Saga leaves <pb id=pb5 n=5>at the beginning were severed from the rest, and many of them cut up for binding. This part of the history of H is thus told by Arne in a slip in AM. 435: &lsquo;These Landnama leaves and those of Christendom&apos;s Saga I got nearly all from Sir Olaf Johnsson [died 1707, father of John Olafsson, his last secretary], but the father of Sir Olaf, Sir John Torfason, of Stead in Sugande-firth [N. W. Iceland], got these leaves from a farmer in the west near him, and took them completely asunder, one from the other, using them to cover <hi>quires</hi> or pamphlets. Some of these Landnama leaves I got from another place than from Sir Olaf. I saw that these leaves belonged to the beginning of that volume [Hawk&apos;s-book, the remainder of which he had still, as appears below, in book form], and had undoubtedly in old time been bound up therein, and therefore I put them in there, in order that the volume should so far be complete. But the volume itself [AM. 544], with the exception of those Landnama and Christendom leaves, I got, if I remember right, from Gaulweriaby in Floe, and it had certainly wandered thither after Master Bryniolf&apos;s death. Master Bryniolf had a copy [John&apos;s AM. 105] written from those Landnama and Christendom Saga, and the book must then have been complete.&rsquo;

<p>It may be added that these leaves somehow, after Arne&apos;s death, had been taken again out of Hawk&apos;s-book and put under AM. 371, but in 1884 I asked the Librarians to reset them, according to Arne Magnusson&apos;s own direction, in their original place.

<p>The whole of Landnama and Christni Saga is in Hawk&apos;s own handwriting.

<p>The following table, founded on close calculation from the extant leaves, shows the original state of the beginning of Hawk&apos;s-book; three leaves within <hi>thick brackets</hi> (6, 13, 14) were <hi>lost</hi> in John Erlendsson&apos;s days, not being in his copy. Of leaf 6 (p. 36, line 10, to p. 42, line 1) I can find no trace in earlier times, unless it be in Arngrim&apos;s <hi>Specimen Island. Hist.</hi> (which we mark &lsquo;Spec.&rsquo;), but it would seem that a strip of leaf 14, the lower half, existed when the book was in Sir Thord Johnsson&apos;s hands.

<p>Since John Erlendsson&apos;s time the leaves in <hi>ordinary brackets</hi> have been lost. The leaves <hi>unbracketed</hi> still remain to us.

<!-- TODO: handle thick brackets -->

<p>[1, 2, 3], 4, [5], <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>6<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>, [7, 8], 9, [10, 11, 12], <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>13, 14<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>, [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22], 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, [30, 31], 32, 33, [34], 35, 36, 37, [38, 39, 40], 41, 42, 43, 44, [45].

<p>The second gap (p. 78, line 20, to p. 85, line 3) must have been of <hi>two</hi> leaves, for the amount of text in S is too much for one leaf of H. Making allowance for the fact that S is here defective and curtailed, and that, as we gather from M&ast;, the story of the Ceallacings was fuller in H than in S, the whole text would fit into two leaves.

<p>I have been able to calculate that the Landnama-book began on the reverse of the first leaf. The junction between Landnama and Christni Saga began about the middle of leaf 39. Hence of Ld. have been saved 14, and <pb id=pb6 n=6>of Chr. Saga 4,&mdash;18 in all out of 45, and these in a lamentable state, two of the Chr. leaves pared about, nearly all having been used for binding, stretched over boards. Arne made untiring efforts to get more of the lost leaves: his correspondence is given in my preface to Biskopa Sogor (1858), from which it appears that priest Olaf Johnsson was guilty of the mutilation of the MS., though he endeavours to shift the blame upon the poor farmer. Luckily John Erlendsson&apos;s copy is usually very accurate; for though he often enough skips lines or sentences, he always corrects himself, underlining the delenda, and then beginning afresh. One curious error has hereby arisen in Bk. I. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1; he writes, &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>fyr norðan Hialtland sva at <hi>siór er í miðjum hlíðum</hi></foreign>,&rsquo; then corrects and <hi>underlines</hi> &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>siór er í m. hlíðum</foreign>,&rsquo; but forgets to underline &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>sva at.</foreign>&rsquo; Hence my bewilderment in Icelandic Reader, p. 338, ll. 17&ndash;20; nothing but autopsy can help in such cases. I have, however, found one place where he has skipped a line (III. <hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 2).

<p>The earlier compilations in Biorn&apos;s time are too arbitrary and inaccurate to be of use. In admitting them as helps one simply brings a world of confusion into what is already a sufficiently delicate task.

<p>The history of <hi rend=sc>Sturla&apos;s-book</hi> is almost a blank, not a scrap of the vellum remaining. Hawk, in his Colophon (p. 234), speaks of a book made by Sturla the Lawman. We can identify John Erlendsson&apos;s copy as drawn from a vellum of this Sturla-book by its pedigrees being drawn to &lsquo;Sturla í Hvammi&rsquo; and other worthies of the Sturlung family, notably to &lsquo;the mother of the Sturlungs.&rsquo; The very use of &lsquo;í Hvammi&rsquo; rather than &lsquo;Hvamm-Sturla,&rsquo; as Hawk puts it, is characteristic and contemporary, and would fix the autotype to some one of the Sturlung family.

<p>But the existence of this type of Landnama-book during the 14th century is still further proved by the fact that there are many Sagas in which pieces out of Landnama-book were inserted by their latest editors or compilers, (Olaf Tryggvason, Grette Saga,) and in all cases these citations follow the Sturla text distinctly, and are to be used as if taken from some sister or daughter MS. Judging by its frequent use&mdash;for even the author of Bardar Saga, a fictitious Saga of the 14th century, largely draws from it&mdash;we suspect that there was more than one MS. of the Sturla type. However, only one copy survived into the 17th century, viz. the copy that Biorn o&apos; Scardsa knew and called &lsquo;Landnama,&rsquo; Thord o&apos; Hitardale &lsquo;Önnur-bók,&rsquo; and which Bishop Bryniolf luckily made John Erlendsson copy. After this transcript was taken of it, when it must have been well-nigh perfect, it vanishes without a sign. I have fancied that it may have been sent abroad as a present by the bishop to the king or some other noble collector, and been lost at sea or by accident on the way. As to its age we have only John Erlendsson&apos;s copy, which is oftentimes normalized into his own spelling, to help us; there are, however, a few distinctive phonisms which pierce through John&apos;s normalization, such as &lsquo;lb&rsquo; for &lsquo;lf,&rsquo; and from considering and weighing all I incline to think it was a good 14th-century copy of an older MS. of the Sturlunga time, and was not itself of the Sturlunga time.

<pb id=pb7 n=7><p><hi rend=sc>Mela-book</hi> must claim a few lines to itself on account of the confusion which has hitherto prevailed with respect to it. It was a closely-written vellum, containing other Sagas besides Landnama-book, besides genealogical matter, etc. The ply or fold, which survives of the Landnama part of it, was, we think, the second of a quarternion or gathering of four folds. The first page of its first leaf is black and dirty, having been stretched over boards for binding; however, its contents were most of them read by Mr. Sigurdsson and found to consist of pedigrees (printed, as far as they can be read in continuity, in Sturlunga, 1878, vol. ii. 497&ndash;98). These pedigrees continue on the next page, but cease at the 16th line of its first column, and allow Landnama to begin on the 17th line, and fill of course the rest of that and the next columns (Reader, pp. 17&ndash;19). The next two plies, four leaves, are wholly lost; but then comes the other leaf of our ply, and on it, as we should have supposed, Landnama-book is still going on, covering both pages (II. ch. <hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 2 to ch. <hi rend=bold>22.</hi> 2). The knowledge of the contents of the missing leaves enables us to calculate how large a space Landnama-book must have filled, and how many leaves of it are lost.

<p>From Thord&apos;s Compilation (for, as might be expected, he sometimes omits to note down &lsquo;Landnama-book,&rsquo; now and then even puts it in a wrong place), inasmuch as we know the contents of Hawk&apos;s-book and Sturla-book, we can, by simple subtraction, get a residue drawn from the now perished parts of Mela-book. But Thord did not limit himself to taking extracts from the Landnama part of Mela-book, but also extracted bits of the Vatzdæla, Eyrbyggia, Floamanna Sagas and Glúma, which were also in the vellum before him (see Fornsogur, Leipzig, 1860, pp. 189&ndash;195, and the foot-notes to pp. 195&ndash;204). Yet it is not right to use these extracts of his as if they had ever formed part of Landnama-book: their place is in the apparatus criticus of the respective Sagas to which they belong, and much confusion has resulted in editions from this not being known. Of course it was not till the full contents of the original Mela-book vellum were (in 1840) found out by Mr. Sigurdsson that this necessary distinction could be observed.

<p>We distinguish therefore between &lsquo;Mela-book,&rsquo; meaning the Landnama part, and the &lsquo;Mela-book vellum,&rsquo; meaning the whole MS., precisely as we did with regard to Hawk&apos;s-book.

<p>The Mela-book vellum was written, as we judge from the handwriting, about 1430; but it must be, as far as Landnama goes, a copy of a MS. of the end of the 13th century; for Thord, citing a passage in which the List of Law-speakers is given, says, after naming a man whose office ends in 1272, &lsquo;here ends the list of Law-speakers in my Landnama-book,&rsquo; so that the scribe of 1430 is copying a MS. 150 years old in his day. We can even tell by a curious leap (from Bk. II. ch. <hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 6 to ch. <hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 3) which the scribe makes from the middle of one pedigree to the middle of another, three chapters ahead without any ado, that there was a leaf missing in this archetype, and that he did not even notice the omission, <pb id=pb8 n=8>which indeed was hardly to be detected at first, being in the midst not of a story, but of a genealogy. One might even, from the amount of matter omitted, roughly calculate the size of the lost autotype&apos;s page.

<p>In the Mela-book vellum about nine leaves or eighteen pages were, we calculate, filled with Landnama matter (not one-third of the full text as in H). It is difficult to tell how far the autotype was abridged, or under what conditions it was produced. This is a problem beyond us at present. The Landnama part of Mela-book as also the List of Law-speakers was, when Sir Thord&apos;s compilation was made, complete, and the rest of the Sagas that were in the same vellum in the main complete also. The whole, when complete, might be calculated at about sixty leaves. By Arne&apos;s day only twelve were left, of which two only, as we have seen, touch Landnama matter; which twelve leaves I, in 1884 (completing my former work of 1860), gathered duly into AM. 445 b, entitling the whole the &lsquo;Mela-book vellum.&rsquo;

<p>A peculiarity of S is the frequent occurrence of blanks, but in three out of four instances it turns on the name of a man&apos;s wife, in the recurring phrase, N. N. married ... <hi>their</hi> son (sons), etc. These blanks H and M do not fill up, and the Editor believes that Are&apos;s text never included those names, but that the writer of S wished to aim at uniformity, hoping perhaps to light upon the names which the MSS. before him did not supply. Are seems to have passed on in such cases without remark.

<p>Hawk only mentions having used the books of Sturla and Styrme. Having Sturla&apos;s-book, we can subtract it from the rest of Hawk&apos;s-book, and presume what is left to be Styrme&apos;s. (A few glosses, such as I. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1, may be Hawk&apos;s own, but besides the pedigrees that is all.) And this enormously simplifies the problem, which, without the help of Sturla&apos;s-book, would have been indeed a difficult one. We get some notion of what <hi rend=sc>Styrme&apos;s-book</hi> must have been, and note that only three authorities are cited&mdash;Are&apos;s-book, and the Borgfirdinga-kynslóð by Brand the Chronicler <hi>or</hi> Frode (II. <hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1), and the information supplied by Colsceg the Wise (IV. <hi rend=bold>9</hi> sqq.), as to a particular part of the country. How far Styrme himself was compiling, and how far working from another compilation, we cannot at present tell. As to Hawk&apos;s fidelity, we must not be too exacting in fixing the highest standard; he copies names and facts accurately enough as a whole, and where he makes mistakes, they are excusable from the difficulty and toil of the task. But we can detect one important omission at least, and from that judge that there were, most probably, others of more or less import, and it is necessary to note this if we want to have a complete idea of the way MSS. were copied by intelligent scribes in the Middle Ages. The Story of Leot (Bk. II. ch. <hi rend=bold>24</hi>) would have been before Hawk&apos;s eyes in Sturla&apos;s-book,&mdash;as also II. <hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 4, and <hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 6,&mdash;and by his own rule he ought to have taken it from there, even if it were not found in Styrme&apos;s-book; but he has omitted it altogether. It strikes one that Bk. II. chs. <hi rend=bold>18&ndash;24</hi> incl. (and <pb id=pb9 n=9>the story of Leot falls within this section) is in S thickly strewn with minute genealogical matter <hi>not</hi> found in H. Three reasons for this suggest themselves. Was Hawk less accurate here? Or, was his copy of S defective here? Or, was our copy of S that survived, glossed here by some local western genealogist? We should prefer the last alternative. Elsewhere S adds whole sections only sparingly, e.g. III. <hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 5, IV. <hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 5, <hi rend=bold>19.</hi> 4. It is lucky that, on the whole, Hawk follows Styrme&apos;s-book, because it was certainly the better text, and we must not too literally accept his broad statement that, for the most part, they contained the same text. The place of honour he gives to Sturla is probably on account of his rank and family.

<p>The real problem of the exact <hi>provenance</hi> of each part of the Landnama-book, as it now stands, lies behind Hawk, Sturla, and Styrme; they were editors, not authors. There are many parts of the book which are clearly not Are&apos;s work, nor ranging with Are&apos;s plan, but they are old, they are bits of real tradition, and we cannot cut them out haphazard, nor can we give their origin, nor say how they came to take their place in the original framework as devised by Are. It is with these questions that criticism must deal: in this place we must content ourselves with stating the existing facts.

<p>Landnama-book was by no means unfrequently quoted by the compilers of the writing ages of Iceland. In the 14th century the Great Olaf&apos;s Saga, extant in several MSS. (Flatey-book, AM. 61, Berg-book, etc.), contains whole pages from it touching the discoverers, the Christian Settlers, Eiric the Red, and other matters which interested the compiler or seemed germane to the book he was copying. Again, Grette&apos;s Saga has several pickings from Landnama-book used by its 14th-century editors to eke out the Saga or give it an air of history. The still more fabulous and fictitious Sagas of the 14th century, the Sagas of Bard, Viglund, Thorstan Oxfoot, are all largely helped out by Landnama-book, and we are even able from Bard&apos;s Saga to supply a missing name in our S (III. <hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 3). All these citations, save those of Thorstan Oxfoot&apos;s Saga, were taken from a sister MS. of S. It has been declared with regard to classic Greek and Latin books that quotations almost invariably present poorer text than the texts themselves. But this observation would apply tenfold here. All these quotations would cover well-nigh the seventh part of the whole Landnama, yet taken all in all they give scarcely a line without impairing or curtailing the text.

<p>But in the 13th-century citations the cases stand a little differently. Floamanna Saga actually, for the only time in the classic literature, cites Landnama-book by <hi>name</hi>. Its first twelve chapters and ch. 18 are just Landnama-book dramatized. But the text used here is an old one lying at the back of H and S, and from it we gather one important link in a pedigree (p. 19, note 5).

<p>In Egil&apos;s Saga, again, chapters of Landnama-book are freely paraphrased, though not cited by name. Two passages (II. <hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 9, 10) give us <pb id=pb10 n=10>fragments of a text now lost in H or S, possibly earlier than Styrme&apos;s-book. The Landnama sections of Eyrbyggia are given in § 3; those of Laxdola and Vatzdola Sagas will be given in the Fourth Book, §§ 2 and 3, and need not be dwelt on here. Havard&apos;s Saga, curiously enough, yields latest evidence as to the existence of this pre-Hawk text. In the 16th century this Saga seems to have existed in one MS. &lsquo;mutilum in calce,&rsquo; and a fictitious ending was therefore manufactured by the help of Landnama. He must have used a better text than ours, for this late paraphrast has helped us to mend a passage (Bk. II. <hi rend=bold>24.</hi> 2) in S (for the chapter is missing in H): the word &lsquo;gersomi&rsquo; is a proof positive of the authority of the paraphrast&apos;s text.

<p>The sad loss of three leaves in Hawk&apos;s-book may be estimated when we remember that in the portion of S, corresponding to two of those leaves, there are three grave errors&mdash;the bit about Thord Gelle (II. <hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 8), the omission of Are&apos;s own ancestors (II. <hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 14), and the corrupt paragraph about the Ceallacings (II. <hi rend=bold>16</hi>). S&ast; yields no help in these places.

<p>The object of the present edition is to give the text of Are&apos;s day as purely as may be, whereof all obvious insertions, such as the continuations of pedigrees (to Hawk in Hawk&apos;s-book, and to the Melamen in Mela-book, and to the Sturlungs in Sturla-book), are eliminated and given at the end of this volume. What pieces of <hi>later</hi> work (glosses, legends of genealogies, references of later date) are left in the text, are marked off by thick brackets.

<p>The foot-notes are confined to the most substantial and necessary matters of text.

<p>Sturla&apos;s-book being itself an abridgment, his chief omissions and inversions will be given together in an appendage.

<p>There are a few cases where we give a <hi>double text</hi>, printing the two versions together, as it is important that no variations of any note should be relegated in foot-notes or appendices.

<p>As instances of these, to show the state of the text, we would notice a passage where S gives a varying text (pp. 16, 17) reversing the order of the discoverers of Iceland. More interesting, however, are the varying passages in M, such as those relating to Blund-Cetil (II. <hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 5) and to the Iron-Smith (II. <hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 11), to Ord o&apos; Tongue (I. <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 4); but of greater moment still the section touching Scalla-Grim (II. <hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1), where there can be no doubt, as we shall elsewhere show, that M is right, and solves the historic difficulty which the enormous extent of Scalla-Grim&apos;s claim, as given in S, created. It is impossible here to restore the true text in I. <hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1, so we leave it just as it stands in S; and in II. <hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1, we give the text according to M. We lack Styrme&apos;s-book here, and in Hawk&apos;s-book just here one leaf is missing, though we presume that in this instance he followed Sturla&apos;s text, it being the longest. M gives fresh sections, absent both in H and S, II. <hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1, <hi rend=bold>21.</hi> 2, III. <hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 3; and single clauses, III. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 2, IV. <hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 3, line 7, <hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 7, V. <hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 6, <hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 2, line 17.

<pb id=pb11 n=11><p>The verses which are preserved in Landnama-book fall into two categories, one comprising verses given in their old rough state, the other covering verses <hi>touched up</hi> and remodelled in accordance with 13th-century taste. In the first case they are printed and translated in full; in the second, the reader is referred to the Corpus Poeticum Boreale, and the translation only gives as much of them as is manifestly old. Each particular case will be briefly discussed in appended notes.

<p>Our 13th-century MSS. of Landnama-book, like other Icelandic vellums, did not follow their archetype in spelling, and are therefore not to be finally followed in this respect. In the present text the spelling is in accordance with the oldest vellums, and comes as near Are&apos;s as is needful or practicable, the chief discrepancies between our spelling and Are&apos;s being that we use both þ and ð, and make freer use of k than he would have done, for the convenience of students who may the easier use the Oxford Lexicon.

<p>The spelling which is used in the first three Books of this work, relating to the Settlement, Constitution, and Conversion of Iceland, marks off to the eye and ear the early pragmatic history of Are&apos;s days and Are&apos;s school from the late Epic history of the Family Histories.

<p>Are divided his work into books, and (as we learn from the last chapter, V. <hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1, 2) marked off these books into sections, giving one to each of the greater settlers whose families and adventures are therein. This arrangement of his we have considered ourselves bound to, and have therefore neglected recent notation; we have further helped the reader by breaking up the chapters into small paragraphs, after the manner of other classics.

<p>Older editions of this book are the interesting black-letter editio princeps of Scalholt, 1688; the Copenhagen edition, with Latin version, of 1774,&mdash;both founded on the rough 17th-century compilation of Biorn o&apos; Scardsa; the Copenhagen Rafn&apos;s edition of 1830,&mdash;founded on Hawk&apos;s-book. John Sigurdsson&apos;s edition of 1843 gives for the first time Sturla&apos;s text in its large print, putting H or M in small print in foot-notes, or in italics into the text. The MS. notation of these older editions marks H as C, S as B, and M vellum as E c, while Thord&apos;s compilation is cited as E.

<p>The translation is literal, the same technical terms being always Englished in the same way, and the word of the original being preserved where, as in the case of <hi>gode</hi> or <hi>herse</hi>, its exact connotation cannot be given in our English word. In the text <hi>brackets</hi> show interpolation, and if thick, double text; but in the translation, if without note of MS., the plain brackets contain <hi>explanatory matter</hi>; Italics, <hi>supplied matter</hi>, as in A. V. of the Bible. The names are normalized in the translation into O. E. shape pretty consistently. Where the original Irish equivalents are given in brackets the O. N. form is preserved in the translation. The text being above the translation will in every case prevent any confusion in these heads.

<pb id=pb12 n=12><p>We have extended the peculiar genealogical contractions used in Landnama MSS. in every case, and this was necessary as several mistakes have occurred through the misinterpretation or copying of these contractions. The later genealogies, printed in Appendix, show the way in which these pedigrees are given in 13th-century Icelandic MSS. and their copies, where the letters .f. = father in all cases of the word, .s. = son in all cases singular, .ss. = sons in all cases plural, &mring; or <ab rend="font(uncial)">&mring;</ab> = mother in all cases singular, .d. = daughter in all cases singular. This must be remembered in cases of textual criticism. There is e.g. a case I have met with where <ab rend="font(uncial)">m</ab> and &lsquo;oc&rsquo; have been confounded. The emendation, Bk. II. <hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 8, is based on this. There must probably still be cases in our texts where such mistakes have caused errors we have not been able to detect, though we have found out more than one instance.

<p>Other contractions, such as those for the <hi>proper</hi> names, Þ for Thor, and the like, geographical, f. for firth, and the lð which stands for &lsquo;land&rsquo; or &lsquo;l&aolig;nd,&rsquo; singular or plural; this latter we have extended according to the sense and context, thus &lsquo;hann nam land&rsquo; the standing phrase, but &lsquo;l&aolig;nd&rsquo; where the plural &lsquo;lands&rsquo; is inferred.

<p>All proper names are given as in Are&apos;s own day, but no further back, not as the persons who owned them would necessarily have spoken them. Thus Are said Thord, and so we give it, but Thord Gelle would no doubt have called himself &lsquo;Thorrod.&rsquo; So in the case of Oleif. See Lexic. 471.b. In Gaelic or otherwise foreign-looking name we use <hi>c</hi>, not only in Ceartan, Ceallac, but also in Cetil, where it presumably represents a disguised Icelandised = Gael. Cathal.

<p>The arrangement of Are&apos;s great work, which is at once simple, consistent, and scientific, needs a word or two here. A glance at the map will show that only the rim of Iceland is inhabited, and that a circuit of the coast will practically include all settled spots. Are took advantage of this fact for his plan. In five books he makes the circuit of the island sun-wise, taking settlement after settlement in due geographical order. He starts, after a prologue and an introductory section on the first discoverers of Iceland, on his progress at the spot where the first great settlement was made by the present Reykjavik. In the first book he got as far as the west-end of the South-land. His second book takes the West-friths, the third the North-land, the fourth the East-frith, the fifth dealing with the east part of the South-lands and completing the work. The fifth and first books together make up the account of the South-lands: the whole work is like an ancient ring with ends that correspond <figure id="openring" rend="image(images/openring.png) position(inline)"><figDesc>o-like symbol which is open at the bottom.</figDesc></figure>. This plan is carried out without divergence, and where information is supplied by Colsceg or other friends, such work falls easily into its due place.

<p>It is interesting to note that Mela-book, as we have it, starts with the beginning of the South-land quarter, not in the midst of the South-lands as Are had done, all presumably in <hi>four</hi> books.



<pb id=pb13 n=13>
<div2 type=Translated lang=is rend="toc-head(Islandic Text)">

<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<div3 id=prologue lang=is rend="align-with(en.prologue)" type=Section>
<head>Þetta es <hi lang=la>Prologus</hi> fyrer bóc þesse.</head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a13.1>Íaldafars-bóc, þeirre es Beda prestr heilagr g&oelig;rðe, es <anchor id=a13.2>geteð eylannz þess es Thile heiter á bócom, es sagt es at <anchor id=a13.3>ligge vj d&oeacute;gra sigleng norðr frá Bretlande. Þar sagðe <anchor id=a13.5>hann eige koma dag á vet<hi>t</hi>r, þá es nótt es lengst<note place=apparatus id=an13.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá es ... lengst]</ab> add. S&ast; (Fl.-book).</note>: ok eige nótt á<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a13.6>sumar, þá es dagr <hi>es</hi> lengstr. Til þess ætla vitrer menn þat haft <anchor id=a13.7>at Ísland sé Thile kallað, at þat es víða á landeno, at sól skínn <anchor id=a13.8>um <choice resp=errata><sic>vet<hi>t</hi>r</sic><corr>n&oeacute;tr</corr></choice> þá es dagr es lengstr: en þat es víða um daga, at sól <anchor id=a13.9>sér eige þá es nótt es lengzt.&mdash;En Beda prestr andaðesk dccxxxv <anchor id=a13.10>&aoacute;rom efter holdgan várs Herra Jesu Christi, at því es riteð es,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a13.11>meirr an c ára fyrr an<note place=apparatus id=an13.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>an]</ab> add. S. af Norege, S.</note> Ísland bygðesk af Norðm&aolig;nnom. En áðr <anchor id=a13.12>Ísland bygðesk af Norðm&aolig;nnom vóro þar þeir menn es Norð&shy;menn <anchor id=a13.13>kalla Papa; þeir vóro menn Cristner; ok hyggja menn at <anchor id=a13.14>þeir mone vereð hafa vestan um haf; þvi at fundosk efter þeim <anchor id=a13.15>b&oeacute;kr Írskar, ok biollor ok baglar, ok enn fleire hluter, þeir at<note place=apparatus id=an13.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> þeir er, S.</note> þat<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a13.16>mátte skilja at þeir vóro Vestmenn. Þat fansk í Papey austr ok <anchor id=a13.17>í Papyle<note place=apparatus id=an13.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þat ... Papyle]</ab> om. S.</note>. Ok es þess geteð á bócom Enskom, at í þann tíma vas <anchor id=a13.18>faret miðle landanna.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 id=en.prologue lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>This is the Prologue to this Book.</head>

<p n=1>In the book of the Course of Ages [<foreign lang=la>De sex hujus saeculi aetatibus</foreign>, part of the book <foreign lang=la>De ratione temporum</foreign>] which priest Beda the holy made, there is spoken of an Island which is called Th&imacr;le in books [in Latin], and it is said that it lies six days&apos; [24 hours&apos;-day] sailing north of Bretland [Brittannia]. There, he said, there came not any day in the winter when the night is longest and no night in summer when the day is longest. The reason why wise men hold that Iceland is Th&imacr;le, is because over much of the country the sun shines through the night when the day is longest <hi>or</hi> in the longest day, and the sun is not seen in the longest night. Now priest Beda died 735 years after the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is written, more than 100 years before Iceland was settled by Northmen. But before Iceland was settled by Northmen there were there those people whom the Northmen call Papas. They were Christian men, and people think that they must have been from the West of the Sea [the British Isles] because there were found after them Irish books and bells and crooks, and yet more things, by which it might be perceived that they were West-men. These things were found in East Papey and in Papyli. And it is also spoken of in English books that at that time men went between the lands [British group and Iceland].


</div3>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<pb id=pb14 n=14>
<div3 lang=is id=lib1 n=I rend="align-with(en.lib1)">
<head>LIB. I.</head>

<note place=margin>[24: i. 1.]</note>

<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<p n=0.1><anchor id=a14.1>Her hefr <hi rend=sc>Landnáma-bóc</hi>; ok seger í enom fyrsta Capitula hvert <anchor id=a14.2>skemst es frá Íslande.

<p n=0.2><anchor id=a14.3><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Á þeim tíma er Ísland fansk ok bygðisk af Noregi, var <anchor id=a14.4>Adrianus Papa í Roma ok Johannes, sa es enn v var með því <anchor id=a14.5>nafni í því sæti: en Hloðver Hloðversson keisari fyr norðan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a14.6>Fiall: en Leo ok Alexander son hans yfir Mikla-garði: þá var <anchor id=a14.7>Haraldr enn Hárfagri konungr yfir Noregi: en Eirikr Eymundar <anchor id=a14.8>son yfir Svia-ríki, ok Biorn son hans: en Gormr enn Gamli at <anchor id=a14.9>Danmork: Elfraðr enn Ríki í Englandi ok Iátvarðr son hans: <anchor id=a14.10>en Ciarvall at Dyflinni: Sigurðr enn Ríki iarl at Orkneyjum.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><ab type=lineNum>10</ab>


<p n=1.1><anchor id=a14.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Svá segja vitrer menn, at or Norege frá Staðe sé vii <anchor id=a14.12>d&oeacute;gra sigleng til Horns á austan-verðo Íslande:

<p n=1.1.1><anchor id=a14.13>En frá Snæfellz-nese<note place=apparatus id=an14.1><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Sniofallz, H.</note> iiii d&oeacute;gra sigleng til Hvarfs á Gr&oeacute;na-lande:

<p n=1.1.2><anchor id=a14.15><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Af Hernom af Norege skal sigla iamnan í vestr til Hvarfs á<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a14.16>Gr&oeacute;n<hi>a</hi>-lande; ok es þá siglt fyr norðan Hiallt-land,&mdash;þvi at eins <anchor id=a14.17>sé þat at all-góð sé sióvar-sýn&mdash;en fyr sunnan Færeyjar, svá at <anchor id=a14.18>siór es í miðjom hlíðom; en svá fyr sunnan Ísland, at þeir hafa af <anchor id=a14.19>fogl ok hval.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an14.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15&ndash;19.</ab> <foreign lang=en-UK><hi>Interpolation</hi>, instead of which S reads:&mdash;</foreign>En <anchor id=a14.20>sva er sagt, ef siglt er or Bíorgvin rétt í vestr til Hvarfsins á Gr&oeacute;nlande, at þá <anchor id=a14.21>man siglt vera tylft fyrir sunnan Ísland. <!-- Moved text: --><foreign lang=en-UK>... But it is so said, that if one sail out of Beorgwin [Bergen] right west to the Wharf in Greenland, that the course will be a twelve days&apos; sail [i. e. about fifty sea miles] to the south of Iceland.</foreign></note>


<pb id=pb15 n=15><note place=margin>[27: i. 1.]</note>

<p n=1.1.3><anchor id=a15.1>Frá Reykjanese á sunnan-verðo Íslande es þriggja d&oeacute;gra haf <anchor id=a15.2>til Iolldo-laups á Írlande í suðr:

<p n=1.1.4><anchor id=a15.3>En frá Langa-nese á norðan-verðo Íslande es fiogorra d&oeacute;gra haf <anchor id=a15.4>til Svalbarða norðr í Hafs-botn.

<p n=1.1.5><anchor id=a15.5>En d&oeacute;gr-sigleng es til Úbygða á Gr&oeacute;n<hi>a</hi>-lande or Kolbeinsey í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a15.6>norðr.


<p n=2.1><anchor id=a15.7><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Garðarr hét maðr, son Svávars ens S&oeacute;nska; hann <anchor id=a15.8>átti iarðer í Siólande, en vas f&oeacute;ddr í Svia-ríke. <anchor id=a15.9>Hann fór til Suðreyja at heimta f&aolig;ðor-arf kono sínnar. En es <anchor id=a15.10>hann siglðe í g&oelig;gnom Pettlandz-fi&aolig;rð, þá sleit hann undan veðr,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a15.11>ok rak hann vestr í haf; hann kom at lande fyrer austan Horn&mdash;þar <anchor id=a15.12>vas þá h&aolig;fn.&mdash;Garðarr <sic corr="siglðe">siglde</sic> umhverfiss landet, ok visse at <anchor id=a15.13>þat vas eyland. Hann kom á fi&aolig;rð þann es hann kallaðe Skiál&shy;fanda; <anchor id=a15.14>þar skuto þeir báte, ok gekk á Náttfare þræll hans; þá <anchor id=a15.15>slitnaðe fest<hi>r</hi>en, ok kom hann í Náttfara-vík fyr útan Skugga-bi&aolig;rg;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a15.16>en Garðarr kom &aolig;ðrom-megen fiarðarens, ok vas þar um <anchor id=a15.17>vettrenn&mdash;því kallaðe hann þar Húsa-vík.&mdash;Náttfare vas efter með <anchor id=a15.18>þræl sínn ok amb&aoacute;tt&mdash;því heiter þar Náttfara-vík.&mdash;Garðarr siglðe <anchor id=a15.19>austr aftr, ok lofaðe miok landet, ok kallaðe Garðars-holm.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a15.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Naddoðr<note place=apparatus id=an15.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Naddoðr]</ab> S; Naddoddr, H.</note> hét maðr, bróðer &OElig;xna-Þóress, mágr Olvéss Barna&shy;karls;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a15.21>hann vas víkingr mikell&mdash;af því stað-festesk hann í Færeyjom, <anchor id=a16.1><pb id=pb16 n=16><note place=margin>[26: i. 26.]</note>at hann átte hverge annars-staðar vel friðt<note place=apparatus id=an16.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> fritt, Cd.</note>. Hann fór or Norege, <anchor id=a16.2>ok vilde til Eyjanna; ok varð sæ-hafe til Garðars-holms, ok kom í <anchor id=a16.3>Reyðar-fi&aolig;rð í Aust-fi&aolig;rðom; ok gengo þeir þar á en hæsto fi&aolig;ll, <anchor id=a16.4>at vita, ef þeir sæe nockorar manna-vister eða reyke; ok s&aoacute; þeir <anchor id=a16.5>ecke líkenda<note place=apparatus id=an16.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>líkenda]</ab> S; tíðenda, Cd.</note>. En es þeir siglðo frá landeno, fell sniór mikell.&mdash;Af<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a16.6>því kallaðe hann Snæ-land.&mdash;Þeir lofoðo miok landet.

<p n=2.2.1><anchor id=a16.7>[S: Svá er sagt at menn skyldo fara or Norege til Færeyja,&mdash;nefna <anchor id=a16.8>sumer til þess Naddoð víking&mdash;en þá rak vestr í haf, ok fundo þar <anchor id=a16.9>land mikit. Þeir gengo upp í Austfi&aolig;rðom á fiall eitt hátt, ok <anchor id=a16.10>sásk um víða, ef þeir sæe reyke, eða n&oelig;ckor líkende til þess at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a16.11>landet være bygt; ok s&aoacute; þeir þat ecke. Þeir fóro aftr um hausteð til <anchor id=a16.12>Færeyja. Ok es þeir siglðo af landeno, fell snær mikill á fi&aolig;ll&mdash;ok <anchor id=a16.13>fyrer því k&aolig;lloðo þeir landet Snæ-land. Þeir lofoðo miok landet.

<p n=2.2.2><anchor id=a16.14>Þar heiter nú Reyðar-fiall á Austfi&aolig;rðom es þeir h&aolig;fðo at komet.

<p n=2.2.3><anchor id=a16.15>Svá sagðe Sæmundr prestr enn Fróðe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=2.2.4><anchor id=a16.16>Maðr hét Garðarr, Svávars son, S&oeacute;nskr at ætt. Hann fór at <anchor id=a16.17>leita Snæ-lannz at tilvísan móðor sínnar fram-sýnnar. Hann kom <anchor id=a16.18>at lande fyr austan Horn et Eystra.&mdash;Þar vas þá h&aolig;fn.&mdash;Garðarr <anchor id=a17.1><pb id=pb17 n=17><note place=margin>[28: i. 2.]</note>siglðe umhverfes landet, ok visse at þat vas eyland. Hann vas <anchor id=a17.2>um vetr norðr í Húsavík á Skialfanda ok g&oelig;rðe þar hús. Um <anchor id=a17.3>váret, es hann vas buenn til hafs, sleit frá hónom mann á báte, es <anchor id=a17.4>hét Náttfare, ok þræl ok ambátt; hann bygðe þar síðan es heiter <anchor id=a17.5>Náttfara-vík. Garðarr fór þá til Noregs ok lofaðe miok landet.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=2.2.5><anchor id=a17.6>Hann vas faðer Una, f&aolig;ðor Hroars Tungo-Goða.

<p n=2.2.6><anchor id=a17.7>Efter þat vas landet kallat <hi rend=bold>Garðars-holmr</hi>, ok vas þá skógr <anchor id=a17.8>miðle fiallz ok fi&aolig;ro.]

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a17.9><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Flóke Vilgerðar son hét víkingr mikell: Hann biósk af Roga-lande <anchor id=a17.10>at leita Snælannz.<note place=apparatus id=an17.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Snió-, Cd.</note> Þeir l&aoacute;go í Smior-sunde. Hann feck at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a17.11>blóte miklo, ok blótaðe hrafna þriá, þá es hánom skylldo leið vísa <anchor id=a17.12><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>þvi at þá höfðo hafsiglingar-menn engir leiðar-stein í þann tíma <anchor id=a17.13>í Norðr-l&aolig;ndom<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. Þeir hlóðo þar varða es blóteð hafðe veret, ok <anchor id=a17.14>k&aolig;lloðo Flóka-varða&mdash;þat es þar es m&oeacute;tesk H&aolig;rða-land ok Roga-land.&mdash;Hann <anchor id=a17.15>fór fyrst til Hiallt-lannz, ok lá í Flóka-váge. Þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a17.16>týndesk Geirhilldr, dótter hans, í Geirhilldar-vatne. Með Flóka <anchor id=a17.17>vas á skipe bo<hi>a</hi>nde sá es Þórolfr hét; en annarr Herjolfr; ok Faxe, <anchor id=a17.18>Suðreyskr maðr. Flóke siglðe þaðan til F&oelig;reyja, ok gifte þar <anchor id=a17.19>dóttor sína&mdash;Frá henne vas Þróndr í G&aolig;to.

<p n=2.3.1><anchor id=a17.20>Þaðan siglðe hann út í haf með hrafna þá þriá es hann hafðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a17.21>blóteð í Norege. Ok es hann lét lausan enn fyrsta, fló sá aftr um <anchor id=a18.1><pb id=pb18 n=18><note place=margin>[29: i. 2.]</note>stafn: annarr fló í loft upp, ok aftr til skips: þriðe fló framm um <anchor id=a18.2>stafn, í þá átt es þeir fundo landet. Þeir kómo austan at Horne. <anchor id=a18.3>Þá siglðo þeir fyr sunnan landet. En es þeir siglðo vestr um <anchor id=a18.4>Reykja-nes, ok upp lauk firðenom svá at þeir s&aoacute; Snæfellz-nes, þá <anchor id=a18.5>mælte Faxe&mdash;&lsquo;Þetta mon vesa miket land, es ver h&aolig;fom fundet;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a18.6>her&apos;ro<note place=apparatus id=an18.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ro]</ab> ero, Cd.</note> v&aolig;tn stór&rsquo;&mdash;þat es síðan kallaðr Faxa-óss. Þeir Flóke<note place=apparatus id=an18.2><ab type=textRef>Flóke]</ab> Faxe, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a18.7>siglðo vestr yfer Breiða-fi&aolig;rð, ok tóko þar land sem heiter Vatz&shy;fi&aolig;rðr. <anchor id=a18.8>Fi&aolig;rðrenn allr vas fullr af veiðe-skap, ok g&aoacute;ðo þeir eige <anchor id=a18.9>fyr veiðom at fá til<note place=apparatus id=an18.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>til]</ab> added; om. Cd.</note> heyjanna, ok dó allt kvik-fé þeirra um vettrenn. <anchor id=a18.10>Vár vas helldr kallt. Þá geck Flóke norðr á fi&aolig;ll ok sá fi&aolig;rð einn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a18.11>fullan af haf-ísom&mdash;því k&aolig;lloðo þeir landet <hi rend=sc>Ísland</hi>.

<p n=2.3.2><anchor id=a18.12>Þeir fóro braut um sumaret, ok urðo síð-búner. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Þar sér enn <anchor id=a18.13>skála-toft þeirra inn frá Brians-l&oeacute;k, ok svá hrófet, ok svá seyðe <anchor id=a18.14>þeirra.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi> Þeim beit eige fyrer Reykjanes, ok þar sleit frá þeim <anchor id=a18.15>bátenn, ok á Herjolf; hann kom í Herjolfs-h&aolig;fn. Flóke kom í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a18.16>Hafnar-fi&aolig;rð: þeir fundo hval á eyre einne út frá firðenom, ok <anchor id=a18.17>k&aolig;lloðo þar Hval-eyre. Þar fundosk þeir Herjolfr.

<p n=2.3.3><anchor id=a18.18>Um sumaret siglðo þeir til Noregs. Flóke lastaðe miok landet; <anchor id=a18.19>en Herjolfr sagðe kost ok l&aolig;st af landeno; en Þórolfr kvað driúpa <anchor id=a18.20>smior af hverjo stráe á lande því, es þeir h&aolig;fðo fundet.&mdash;Því vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a18.21>hann kallaðr Þórolfr Smior.

<pb id=pb19 n=19><note place=margin>[31: i. 3.]</note><p n=3.1><anchor id=a19.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Biornolfr hét maðr, en annarr Hróalldr:&mdash;þeir <anchor id=a19.2>vóro syner Hrómunnz Grips sonar&mdash;þeir fóro af Þela-m&aolig;rk <anchor id=a19.3>fyr víga saker, ok stað-festosk í Dals-firðe á Fi&aolig;lom: son <anchor id=a19.4>Bi&aolig;rnolfs vas Orn, faðer Ingolfs ok Helgo; en Hroallz son var <anchor id=a19.5>Hroðmarr, faðer Leifs. Móðer Leifs vas Hroðný, dótter Ketils<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a19.6>Bifro, Horða-Kára sonar<note place=apparatus id=an19.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Móðer Leifs ... Kára sonar]</ab> add. Floam. S.</note>.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a19.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þeir Ingolfr ok Leifr, fóstbr&oeacute;ðr, fóro í hernað með sonom <anchor id=a19.8>Atla iarls ens Mióva af Gaulom, þeim Hásteine, ok Hersteine ok <anchor id=a19.9>Holmsteine. Með þeim fóro &aolig;ll skifte vel. Ok es þeir kómo <anchor id=a19.10>heim, mælto þeir til sam-fara með ser annat sumar. En um vettren<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a19.11>g&oelig;rðo þeir fóst-br&oeacute;ðr veizlo sonom Atla iarls: at þeirre veizlo <anchor id=a19.12>strengðe Holmsteinn heit, at hann skyllde eiga Helgo Arnar dóttor, <anchor id=a19.13>eðr enga kono ella. Um þessa heit-strenging fansk m&aolig;nnom fátt. <anchor id=a19.14>En Leifr roðnaðe<note place=apparatus id=an19.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>roðnaðe]</ab> á at sea, add. S.</note>, ok varð fátt um með þeim Holmsteine þá es <anchor id=a19.15>þeir skilðo þar at boðeno<note place=apparatus id=an19.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þar at boðeno]</ab> add. S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=3.2.1><anchor id=a19.16>Um váret efter bioggosk þeir fóstbr&oeacute;ðr í hernað, ok ætloðo <anchor id=a19.17>at fara til mótz við sono Atla iarls<note place=apparatus id=an19.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> at fara í h. ok æ. til m., S.</note>. Þeir fundosk við Hísar-gafl; <anchor id=a19.18>ok l&aolig;gðo þeir Holmsteinn br&oeacute;ðr þegar til orrosto við þá <anchor id=a19.19>fóst-br&oelig;ðr. En er þeir hofðo barzt um hríð, þá kom at<note place=apparatus id=an19.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> þeim, add. S.</note> Öl&shy;móðr <anchor id=a19.20>enn Gamle, son H&aolig;rða-Kára, frænde Leifs, ok veitte<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a20.1><pb id=pb20 n=20><note place=margin>[32: i. 4.]</note>þeim Ingolfe. Í þeirre orrosto fell Holmsteinn; en Hersteinn <anchor id=a20.2>flýðe. Þá fóro þeir Leifr í hernað. En um vettren efter fór <anchor id=a20.3>Hersteinn at þeim Leife, ok vilde drepa þá. En þeir fengo niósn <anchor id=a20.4>af f&aolig;r hans, ok fóro í mót hónom ok b&aolig;rðosk; ok fell þar Hersteinn. <anchor id=a20.5>Efter þat vóro menn sender á fund Atla iarls ok Hásteins<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a20.6>at bióða sætter; ok sættosk þeir at því, at þeir Leifr guldo eigner <anchor id=a20.7>sínar þeim feðgom.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a20.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þeir fóstbr&oeacute;ðr bioggo eitt miket skip<note place=apparatus id=an20.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>skip]</ab> er þeir áttu, add. S.</note>, ok fóro at leita lannz <anchor id=a20.9>þess, er Hrafna-Flóke hafðe fundet; es þá vas Ísland kallað. Þeir <anchor id=a20.10>fundo landet; ok vóro í Aust-fi&aolig;rðom í Alfta-firðe-enom-syðra.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a20.11>Þeim virðesk landet betr suðr an norðr. Þeir vóro einn vettr á <anchor id=a20.12>landeno, ok fóro þá aftr til Noregs.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a20.13><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Efter þat varðe Ingolfr fé þeirra til Íslannz-ferðar; en Leifr <anchor id=a20.14>fór í vestr-víkeng<note place=apparatus id=an20.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> í hernað, add. S.</note>. Hann herjaðe á Írland, ok fann þar iarð-hús <anchor id=a20.15>miket. Þar geck hann í, ok vas myrkt, þar til er lýste af vápne<note place=apparatus id=an20.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vápne]</ab> sverði, S.</note> því<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a20.16>es maðr hélt á. Leifr drap þann mann, ok tók sverðet, ok miket <anchor id=a20.17>fé annat<note place=apparatus id=an20.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>annat]</ab> af hm, S.</note>.&mdash;Síðan vas hann kallaðr Hi&aolig;r-Leifr.&mdash;Hi&aolig;rleifr herjaðe <anchor id=a20.18>víða um Írland ok feck þar miket her-fang. Þar tók hann þræla <anchor id=a20.19>tio<note place=apparatus id=an20.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tio]</ab> tva, Cd. badly; x. S.</note>, es svá héto: Dufþacr, ok Geirroðr, Scialldbeorn, Halldor, ok <anchor id=a20.20>Drafdrit<note place=apparatus id=an20.6><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Drafdittar, S.</note>.&mdash;Eigi ero fleire nefnder. Efter þat fór Hi&aolig;rleifr til Noregs,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a20.21>ok fann þar Ingolf fóst-bróðor sínn. Hann hafðe fenget áðr Helgo <anchor id=a20.22>Arnar dóttor, systor Ingolfs.

<pb id=pb21 n=21><note place=margin>[33, 34: i. 6.]</note><p n=3.5><anchor id=a21.1><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Vettr þenna feck Ingolfr at blóte miklo, ok leitaðe ser heilla <anchor id=a21.2>um forl&aolig;g sín: en Hi&aolig;rleifr vilde aldrige blóta. Frétten vísaðe <anchor id=a21.3>Ingolfe til Íslannz. Efter <hi>þat</hi> bió sítt skip<note place=apparatus id=an21.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> S; skip sítt, H.</note> hvárr þeirra <corr sic="til " resp=errata></corr>mága til <anchor id=a21.4>Íslannz; hafðe Ingolfr félags-fé þeirra á skipe; en Hi&aolig;rleifr her-fang <anchor id=a21.5>sítt. Þeir l&aolig;gðo til hafs þá es þeir vóro búner, ok siglðo út.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=3.6><anchor id=a21.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Sumar þat es þeir Ingolfr fóro at byggia Ísland hafðe Haraldr <anchor id=a21.7>konongr enn Hárfagre veret xii &aoacute;r konungr í Norege. Þá vas <anchor id=a21.8>liðet frá upphafe þessa<hi>r</hi> veraldar, ok frá því es Adam vas skapaðr, <anchor id=a21.9>vi þúsunder vettra ok lxxiij vettr: en frá holdgan Dróttens várs Jesu <anchor id=a21.10>Christi dccc ára ok lxxiiij vettr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=3.7><anchor id=a21.11><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þeir h&aolig;fðo sam-flot þar til es þeir s&aoacute; Ísland; þá skilðe með <anchor id=a21.12>þeim. En þá es Ingolfr sá land, skaut hann fyr borð &aolig;ndoges-súlom <anchor id=a21.13>sínom til heilla. Hann mælte svá fyrer, at hann skylde þar <anchor id=a21.14>byggja es súlornar k&oeacute;me á land. Ingolfr tók þar land sem nú <anchor id=a21.15>heiter Ingolfs-h&aolig;fðe. En Hi&aolig;rleif rak vestr fyr landet. Feck<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a21.16>hann vatn-fátt. Þá tóko þrælarner Írsko þat ráð, at knoða saman <anchor id=a21.17>miol ok smior, ok k&aolig;lloðo þat úþors<hi>t</hi>-látt&mdash;þeir nefndo þat mi&nmacr;þac.&mdash;En <anchor id=a21.18>es þat vas til buet, kom regn miket, ok tóko þeir þá vatn <anchor id=a21.19>af<note place=apparatus id=an21.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>af]</ab> á, S.</note> ti&aolig;ldom. En es mi&nmacr;þacet tók at mygla, k&aolig;stoðo þeir því fyr <anchor id=a21.20>borð, ok rak þat á land þar<note place=apparatus id=an21.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Min-, S.</note> sem nú heiter Minþacs-eyrr.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=3.7.1><anchor id=a21.21>Hi&aolig;rleifr tók land við Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fða, ok vas þar<note place=apparatus id=an21.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þar]</ab> þá, add. S (badly?).</note> fi&aolig;rðr, ok <anchor id=a22.1><pb id=pb22 n=22><note place=margin>[35: i. 7.]</note>horfðe botnenn at h&aolig;fðanom. Hi&aolig;rleifr let þar g&oelig;ra skála tvá&mdash;ok <anchor id=a22.2>es &aolig;nnor toften xviij faðma, en &aolig;nnor xix.&mdash;Hi&aolig;rleifr sat þar <anchor id=a22.3>um <corr sic=vettren resp=errata>vettrenn</corr>.

<p n=3.7.2><anchor id=a22.4>En um váret vilðe hann sá. Hann átte einn oxa, ok lét hann <anchor id=a22.5>þrælana draga arðrenn; en es þeir Hi&aolig;rleifr vóro at skála, þá g&oelig;rðe<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a22.6>Dufþacr þat ráð, at þeir skyldo drepa oxann, ok segja, at skógar-bi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a22.7>hefðe drepet; en síðan skyldo þeir ráða á þá Hi&aolig;rleif, es<note place=apparatus id=an22.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es]</ab> ef, S.</note> <anchor id=a22.8>þeir leitaðe biarnarens. Efter þat s&aolig;gðo þeir Hi&aolig;rleife þetta. En <anchor id=a22.9>es þeir fóro at leita biarnarens, ok dreifðosk um<note place=apparatus id=an22.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>um]</ab> í, S.</note> skógenn, þá dr&aoacute;po <anchor id=a22.10>þrælarner sér hvern þeirra; ok myrðo þá alla iam-marga ser.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a22.11>Þeir hliópo braut með konor þeirra ok fé<note place=apparatus id=an22.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fé]</ab> lausa-fe, S.</note>, ok bátenn. Þrælarner <anchor id=a22.12>fóro til eyja þeirra, es þeir s&aoacute; til hafs í út-suðr, ok bioggosk þar <anchor id=a22.13>fyrer um hríð.

<p n=3.7.3><anchor id=a22.14>Vífill ok Carle héto þrælar Ingolfs; þá sende hann vestr með <anchor id=a22.15>sió, at leita &aolig;ndoges-súlna sínna. En es þeir kómo til Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fða<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a22.16>fundo þeir Hi&aolig;rleif dauðan. Þá fóro þeir aftr, ok s&aolig;gðo <anchor id=a22.17>Ingolfe þau tíðende; ok let hann ílla yfer. Efter þat fór Ingolfr <anchor id=a22.18>vestr til Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fða. Ok es hann sá Hi&aolig;rleif dauðan, þá <anchor id=a22.19>mælte hann: &lsquo;Líteð lagðesk her fyr góðan dreng, es þrælar <anchor id=a22.20>skyldo at bana verða; ok sé ek svá hverjom verða es eige vill<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a22.21>blóta.&rsquo; Ingolfr lét bua gr&aolig;ft þeirra Hi&aolig;rleifs, ok sá fyr skipe <anchor id=a22.22>þeirra ok feár-hlut.

<pb id=pb23 n=23><note place=margin>[36: i. 8.]</note><p n=3.7.4><anchor id=a23.1>Ingolfr geck þá upp á h&aolig;fðann, ok sá eyjar liggja til hafs í út-suðr. <anchor id=a23.2>Kom hónom þat í hog, at þeir mondo þangat hlaupet hafa, þvi at <anchor id=a23.3>bátrenn vas horfenn. Ok fóro þeir at leita þrælanna, ok fundo þeir þá <anchor id=a23.4>þar sem Eið heiter í Eyjonom; s&aoacute;to þeir þá yfer mat es Ingolfr <anchor id=a23.5>kom at þeim. Þeir urðo felms-fuller, ok hlióp sínn veg hverr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a23.6>þeirra: Ingolfr drap þá alla.&mdash;Þar heiter Dufþacs-skor, es hann <anchor id=a23.7>lézk&mdash;Fleire hliópo þeir fyr berg þar sem við þá es kennt síðan. <anchor id=a23.8>Þar heita síðan Vestmanna-eyjar, es þrælarner<note place=apparatus id=an23.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þrælarner]</ab> S; þeir, H.</note> vóro drepner, þvi at <anchor id=a23.9>þeir vóro Vest-menn. Þeir Ingolfr h&aolig;fðo með ser konor þeirra <anchor id=a23.10>es myrðer h&aolig;fðo veret. Fóro þeir þá aftr til Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fða;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a23.11>vas Ingolfr þar vettr annan.

<p n=3.7.5><anchor id=a23.12>En um sumaret efter fór hann vestr með sió. Hann vas enn <anchor id=a23.13>þriðja vettr under Ingolfs-felle fyr vestan Olfos-&aoacute;; þar ......<note place=apparatus id=an23.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Blank space in H.</note> <anchor id=a23.14>Þau missere fundo þeir Vífell ok Carle &aolig;ndoges-súlor hans við <anchor id=a23.15>Arnar-hvál fyr norðan Heiðe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=3.8><anchor id=a23.16><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Ingolfr fór um váret ofan um Heiðe. Hann tók ser bú-stað <anchor id=a23.17>þar sem &aolig;ndoges-súlor hans h&aolig;fðo á land komet. Hann bió í <anchor id=a23.18>Reykjar-vík&mdash;þar ero enn &aolig;ndoges-súlor þær í eld-húse.

<p n=3.8.1><anchor id=a23.19>En Ingolfr nam land miðle Olfus-ár ok Hval-fiarðar, fyr útan <anchor id=a23.20>Brynjodals-&aoacute;, miðle ok &OElig;xar-ár, ok &aolig;ll nes út<note place=apparatus id=an23.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>miðle ok ... nes út]</ab> S; ok millim hra&nmacr;a gioll nes út, H, <hi>miswritten</hi>.</note>. Þá mælte Carle:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a24.1><pb id=pb24 n=24><note place=margin>[37: i. 9.]</note>&lsquo;Til illz fóro ver um góð heroð, es ver skolom byggja út-nes <anchor id=a24.2>þetta.&rsquo; Hann hvarf í braut, ok amb&aoacute;tt með hónom.

<p n=3.8.2><anchor id=a24.3>Vifle gaf Ingolfr frelse, ok bygðe hann á Vífels-stoðom<note place=apparatus id=an24.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> at Vífils-toftom, S.</note>&mdash;við <anchor id=a24.4>hann es kent Vífils-fell; þar bió hann lenge, ok vas skilríkr <anchor id=a24.5>maðr.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=3.8.3><anchor id=a24.6>Ingolfr lét g&oelig;ra skála á Skála-felli. Þaðan sá hann reyke við <anchor id=a24.7>Olfus-vatn, ok fann þar Carla.

<p n=3.9><anchor id=a24.8><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Ingolfr es frægastr allra lannáms-manna; þvi at hann <anchor id=a24.9>kom her at auðo lande, ok bygðe fyrst<note place=apparatus id=an24.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> fyrstr, S.</note> landet; ok g&oelig;rðo aðrer <anchor id=a24.10>lannáms-menn efter hans d&oeacute;mom síðan.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=3.10><anchor id=a24.11><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Hann átte Hallveigo Fróða dóttor, systor Loftz ens Gamla. <anchor id=a24.12>Þeirra son vas Þorsteinn, es þing lét setja á Kialar-nese, áðr Alþingi <anchor id=a24.13>være<note place=apparatus id=an24.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>være]</ab> var, S.</note> sett: hans son vas Þorkell Máne, l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr, es einn <anchor id=a24.14>heiðenna manna á Islande<note place=apparatus id=an24.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á Islande]</ab> om. S.</note> hefer bazt veret siðaðr at þvi es menn <anchor id=a24.15>vito d&oelig;me til<note place=apparatus id=an24.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at þvi ... d&oelig;me til]</ab> add. S.</note>. Hann lét bera sik í sólar-geisla í hel-sótt<note place=apparatus id=an24.6><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> bana-sótt, S.</note> sínne, ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a24.16>fal sik á hende þeim Goðe es sólena hefðe skapat. Hann hafðe ok <anchor id=a24.17>lifat svá hreinliga, sem þeir Cristner menn es bazt ero siðaðer. <anchor id=a24.18>Son hans vas Þormóðr, es þá vas Allzherjar-Goðe es Cristne kom <anchor id=a24.19>á Ísland. Hans son vas Hamall, faðer Márs ok Þormóðar ok <anchor id=a24.20>Torfa. Sigurðr vas son Márs, f. Hamals, f. Goðmundar, f. Þormóðs<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a24.21>Skeiða-goða<note place=apparatus id=an24.7><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sigurðr ... goða]</ab> om. S.</note>.

<pb id=pb25 n=25><note place=margin>[39: i. 10, 11.]</note><p n=4.1><anchor id=a25.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Biorn Buna hét herser ríkr ok ágætr í Norege; <anchor id=a25.2>hann vas (son) Veðrar-Gríms hersess or Sogne<note place=apparatus id=an25.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hersess or Sogne]</ab> S; k&apos;s (= konungs), H.</note>. <anchor id=a25.3>Grímr átte Herv&aolig;ro, dóttor Þorgerðar, Eylaugs dóttor hersess or <anchor id=a25.4>Sogne. Bi&aolig;rn átte Vélaugo, systor Vémundar ens Gamla. Þau <anchor id=a25.5>&aoacute;tto þriá sono: vas einn Ketill Flatnefr: annarr Helge: þriðe<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a25.6>Hrappr. Þeir vóro ágæter menn; ok es frá þeirra afkvæme mart <anchor id=a25.7>sagt í þesse bók; ok frá þeim es flest allt stór-menne komet á <anchor id=a25.8>Íslande.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a25.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hrappr átte Þórunne Gr&oelig;ningja-Riúpo: þeirra son vas Þórðr <anchor id=a25.10>Skegge; hann átte Vilborgo, Ósvaldz dóttor konongs ok Ulfrúnar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a25.11>ennar Úborno, dóttor Eatmundar Engla konungs.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a25.12><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórðr bygðe fyst í Lóne austr tio vettr eðr fimtán. En es hann <anchor id=a25.13>frá til &aolig;ndoges-súlna sínna í Leiro-váge, þá selde hann l&aolig;nd sín <anchor id=a25.14>Ulflióte; hann vas son Þóro H&aolig;rða-Kára dóttor. En <corr sic="es " resp=errata></corr>hann fór <anchor id=a25.15>vestr með allt sítt ok nam land at ráðe Ingolfs miðle Ulfars-ár ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a25.16>Leiro-vágs-ár, ok bió síðan á Skeggja-st&aolig;ðom. Hans dótter vas <anchor id=a25.17>Helga, es átte Ketilbi&aolig;rn enn Gamle at Mosfelle. Frá Þórðe es <anchor id=a25.18>mart stór-menne komet á Íslande.

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a25.19><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hallr hét maðr, son Þóress Goðlauss, Ormars sonar, bróðor <anchor id=a25.20>Hildar Ormars dóttor, es átte Þorbi&aolig;rn enn Gaulverske, sam-feðra<note place=apparatus id=an25.2><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Emend.; sam-feðre, Cd.</note>:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a25.21>enn hon vas sam-m&oeacute;dd við Þórð Skeggja. Þeir feðgar vilðo eige blóta, <anchor id=a26.1><pb id=pb26 n=26><note place=margin>[41: i. 11]</note>ok trúðo á mátt sínn: Hallr fór til Íslannz, ok nam land með ráðe <anchor id=a26.2>Ingolfs<note place=apparatus id=an26.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>með ráðe Ingolfs]</ab> add. S.</note> miðle Mógils-ár ok Leiro-vágs-ár, ok bió í Múla. Hans <anchor id=a26.3>son vas Helge, es átte Þóríðe Ketilbiarnar dóttor. Þeirra son vas <anchor id=a26.4>Þórðr í Alfs-nese, es átte Goðnyjo Hrafnkels dóttor.

<p n=4.5><anchor id=a26.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Haraldr enn Hárfagre herjaðe vestr um haf, sem ritið<note place=apparatus id=an26.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> ritað, Cd.</note> es í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a26.6>s&aolig;go hans. Hann lagðe under sik allar Suðreyjar, svá langt <anchor id=a26.7>vestr, at eingi Noregs konunga hefer síðan lengra eignask <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>útan <anchor id=a26.8>Magnús konungr Berbeinn<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an26.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>útan ... Berbeinn]</ab> om. S.</note>. En es hann fór vestan, slógosk <anchor id=a26.9>víkingar í Eyjarnar, Skottar ok Írar, ok herjoðo ok rænto víða. <anchor id=a26.10>En es þat spurðe Haraldr konungr, sende hann vestr Ketil Flatnef,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a26.11>son Biarnar Buno, at vinna aftr Eyjarnar.

<p n=4.5.1><anchor id=a26.12>Ketill átte Yngvilde, dóttor Ketils Veðrs hersess af Hringa-ríke; <anchor id=a26.13>þeirra syner vóro þeir, Bi&aolig;rn enn Austr&oeacute;ne, ok Helge Biola<hi>n</hi>: <anchor id=a26.14>Auðr en Diúpauðga ok Þórunn Hyrna vóro d&oeacute;ttr þeirra.

<p n=4.5.2><anchor id=a26.15>Ketill fór vestr, en sette efter<note place=apparatus id=an26.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>efter]</ab> here comes a single vell. leaf.</note> Bi&aolig;rn son sínn. Hann lagðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a26.16>under sik allar Suðreyjar ok g&oelig;rðizk h&aolig;fðinge yfer; en galt &oelig;ngan <anchor id=a26.17>skatt Haralde konunge sem ætlað vas. Þá tók Haraldr konungr <anchor id=a26.18>under sik eigner hans í Norege, en rak braut Bi&aolig;rn son hans.


<p n=5.1><anchor id=a26.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Helge Biola<hi>n</hi>, son Ketils Flatnefs, fór til Íslannz af <anchor id=a26.20>Suðreyjom. Hann vas með Ingolfe enn fyrsta vettr,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a26.21>ok nam með hans ráðe Kialar-nes allt miðle Mógils-ár ok Mýdals-ár; <anchor id=a27.1><pb id=pb27 n=27><note place=margin>[42: i. 12.]</note>hann bió at Hofe. Hans son vas Víga-Hrappr, ok Eyvindr <anchor id=a27.2>Hialti, faðer Kollsveins, f&aolig;ðor Eyvindar, es átte Þórlaugo Kl&oelig;ings <anchor id=a27.3>dóttor. Þeirra dótter vas Þórgerðr, móðer Þóro, es átte Þórkell, <anchor id=a27.4>son Ásgeirs Kneifar<note place=apparatus id=an27.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> kn&apos;far, vell.</note>: þeirra son vas Ogmundr, faðer Ioans bps <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>ens <anchor id=a27.5>Helga<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<p n=6.1><anchor id=a27.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> &OElig;rlygr hét son Hrapps, Biarnar sonar Buno; hann <anchor id=a27.7>vas at fóstre með Patrece byscope enom Helga í <anchor id=a27.8>Suðreyjom. Hann fýstesk at fara til Íslannz, ok bað Patrec byscop, <anchor id=a27.9>at hann sæe um með hónom. Byscop feck hónom kirkjo-við, ok <anchor id=a27.10>bað hann hafa með ser; ok <hi>plenarium</hi>; ok iarn-clocko, ok goll-pening;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a27.11>ok mold vígða, at hann skylde leggja under horn-stafe, ok <anchor id=a27.12>hafa þat fyrer vígslo<note place=apparatus id=an27.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> vixlo, vell.</note>; ok skylde hann helga Columcilla.

<p n=6.1.1><anchor id=a27.13>Þá mælte Patrecr byscop: &lsquo;Hvarge es þú tekr land, þá <corr sic="bygðo" resp=errata>bygðu</corr> <anchor id=a27.14>þar at eins es sér þriú fi&aolig;ll af hafe, ok fi&aolig;rð at seá á miðle hvers <anchor id=a27.15>fiallz, ok dal í hverjo fialle. Þú skalt sigla at eno sy&nmacr;sta fialle;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a27.16>þar man skógr vesa; ok sunnan under fialleno montu rióðr hitta, <anchor id=a27.17>ok lagða upp, eðr reista, þriá steina: reistu þar kirkjo ok bu <anchor id=a27.18>þar.&rsquo;

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a27.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> &OElig;rlygr lét í haf, ok sá maðr á &aolig;ðro skipe es Collr hét, fóst-bróðer <anchor id=a27.20>hans. Þeir h&aolig;fðo sam-flot. Á skipe vas með &OElig;rlyge sá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a27.21>maðr es hét Þorbi&aolig;rn Sporr; annarr Þorbi&aolig;rn Talcne; þriðe <anchor id=a28.1><pb id=pb28 n=28><note place=margin>[44: i. 12.]</note>Þorbi&aolig;rn Scuma: þeir vóro syner B&aolig;ðvars Bl&aolig;ðro-skalla. En es <anchor id=a28.2>þeir kómo í land-v&aoacute;n, g&oelig;rðe at þeim storm mikenn, ok rak þá <anchor id=a28.3>vestr um Ísland. Þá hét &OElig;rlygr á Patrec byscop fóstra sínn til <anchor id=a28.4>lann-t&aolig;ko þeim: ok hann skylde af hans nafne gefa &oelig;r-nefne þar <anchor id=a28.5>sem hann t&oeacute;ke land. Þeir vóro þaðan frá lítla hríð <hi>úti</hi>, áðr an þeir<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a28.6>s&aoacute; land<note place=apparatus id=an28.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>land]</ab> ok voru komnir vestr um landit, add. S.</note>. Hann kom skipe síno í &OElig;rlygs-h&aolig;fn, ok af <hi>því</hi> kallaðe <anchor id=a28.7>hann fi&aolig;rðenn Patrecs-fi&aolig;rð<note place=apparatus id=an28.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> patrex, vell.</note>. En Collr hét á Þór. Þá skilðe í <anchor id=a28.8>stormenom, ok kom hann þar sem Collz-vík heiter, ok braut hann <anchor id=a28.9>þar skip sítt. Þar vóro þeir um vettrenn. Hásetar hans n&aoacute;mo <anchor id=a28.10>þar sumer land, sem enn mon sagt verða.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a28.11><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En um váret bió &OElig;rlygr skip sítt, ok siglðe braut með lið<note place=apparatus id=an28.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lið]</ab> allt, H.</note> <anchor id=a28.12>sítt. Ok es hann kom suðr fyr Faxa-ós, þá kende hann fi&aolig;ll þau <anchor id=a28.13>es hónom vas til vísat. Þar fell útbyrðess iarn-clockan, ok s&oelig;ck niðr. <anchor id=a28.14>En þeir siglðo inn efter firðe, ok tóko þar land sem nú heiter <anchor id=a28.15>Sand-vík á Kialar-nese; þar lá þá iarn-clockan í þara-brúke.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=6.4><anchor id=a28.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hann bygðe under Esjo-berge at ráðe Helga Biolo frænda <anchor id=a28.17>síns; ok nam land á miðle Mógils-ár ok Usvifrs-l&oeacute;kjar. Hann <anchor id=a28.18>g&oelig;rðe kirkjo at Esjo-berge, sem hónom vas boðet. Hialp hét <anchor id=a28.19>kona hans; þeirra son vas Valþiófr, es full-tíða kom til Íslannz <anchor id=a28.20>með &OElig;rlyge. Síðan átte &OElig;rlygr Ísgerðe, dóttor Þormods, Bresa<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a28.21>sonar; þeirra son vas Geirmundr, faðer Halldóro, es átte Þióstolfr, <anchor id=a29.1><pb id=pb29 n=29><note place=margin>[45, 46: i. 13.]</note>son Biarnar Gollbera; þeirra son vas Þórleifr es bió at Esjo-berge <anchor id=a29.2>efter Geirmund móðor-f&aolig;ðor sínn. [M: Frá hónom ero Esbergingar <anchor id=a29.3>komner.] Þeir trúðo á Columcilla þoat þeir være úskírðer. Þórleifr <anchor id=a29.4>vas troll-aukenn, ok tók þó Cristne. Frá hónom es mart <anchor id=a29.5>manna komet. Dótter &OElig;rlygs ok Ísgerðar vas Vélaug, es átte<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a29.6>Gunnlaugr Orms-tunga enn Gamle<note place=apparatus id=an29.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> hin Gamla, H.</note>, ok vas þeirra dótter Þóríðr <anchor id=a29.7>Dylla, móðer Illoga ens Svarta.

<p n=6.5><anchor id=a29.8><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Svart-cell hét maðr: hann fór af Catanese<note place=apparatus id=an29.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Catanese]</ab> Englande, H; Svartkell het maðr Katneskr, hann fór til Ísl., S.</note> til Íslannz, ok <anchor id=a29.9>nam land fyr innan Mýdals-á<note place=apparatus id=an29.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Thus, <hi>not</hi> Myrdals, vell.</note>, ok miðle Eilífsdals-ár, ok bió at <anchor id=a29.10>Kiðja-felle fyrst, en síðan á Eyre; hans son vas Þórkell, faðer<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a29.11>Glúms þess es gamall tók Cristne. Hann baðsk<note place=apparatus id=an29.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> baðs, vell.</note> svá fyrer at crosse: <anchor id=a29.12>&lsquo;Gótt æ g&aolig;mlom m&aolig;nnom! Gótt æ &oeacute;rom<note place=apparatus id=an29.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> orvm, vell.</note> m&aolig;nnom!&rsquo; Hans <anchor id=a29.13>son vas Þórarenn, faðer Glúms á Vatnlauso: Arnleif hét syster <anchor id=a29.14>Svartcels, es átte Þórolfr Vili-gisl, faðer Cleppiarns ens Gamla or <anchor id=a29.15>Flóca-dal: þeirra dótter vas Hallgerðr, es átte Bergþórr Collz son.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=6.6><anchor id=a29.16><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Valþiófr, es fyrr vas geteð, son &OElig;rlygs at Esjo-berge; hann <anchor id=a29.17>nam Ciós alla, ok bió at Meðal-felle; Þorbi&aolig;rn Collr het son <anchor id=a29.18>hans, faðer Hallveigar, es átte Þórðr Lambe&mdash;þat es <hi rend=bold>Valþyflinga-kyn</hi>. <anchor id=a29.19>Signý hét dótter Valþiófs, es Signýjar-staðer ero við kender; <anchor id=a29.20>hána átte Grímkell, son Biarnar Gollbera; þeirra syner vóro þeir<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a30.1><pb id=pb30 n=30><note place=margin>[46: i. 14.]</note>H&aolig;rðr,&mdash;es drepenn vas í Geirs-holme,&mdash;ok Gnúpr, faðer Birnings, <anchor id=a30.2>f&aolig;ðor Gnúps, f&aolig;ðor Eiríks Gr&oeacute;nlendinga byscops. Valbrandr <anchor id=a30.3>hét annarr son Valþiófs, faðer Torfa es fyrst bió á M&aolig;ðro-v&aolig;llom. <anchor id=a30.4>Þeir feðgar g&oelig;rðo félag við Tungo-Odd&mdash;Af því bioggo þeir <anchor id=a30.5>síðan á Breiða-bólstað í Reykjardal-enom-n&oelig;rðra. Torfe vas<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a30.6>faðer Þorkels at Skáneyjo, es átte Arngerðe, dóttor Þorkels Svart-Cetels <anchor id=a30.7>sonar.

<p n=6.7><anchor id=a30.8><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Hvamm-Þórer nam land á miðle Lax-ár ok Fors-ár, ok bió í <anchor id=a30.9>Hvamme. Hann deilðe við Ref um kú þá es Brynja hét, ok <anchor id=a30.10>Brynjo-dalr es við kendr. Sú kvíga hafðe horfet Þóre fyr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a30.11>l&aolig;ngo; en sú kvíga fansk í Brynjo-dale, þar es Refr átte land, ok <anchor id=a30.12>fiórer tiger nauta með henne, þeirra es &aolig;ll vóro frá henne komen; <anchor id=a30.13>ok h&aolig;fðo genget sialf-ala úte. Því kende hvárr-tveggi ser nauten. <anchor id=a30.14>En Þórer féll fyrer Ref með átta mann, þá es þeir b&aolig;rðosk hiá <anchor id=a30.15>hólom þeim es síðan ero kallaðer Þóres-hólar.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=6.8><anchor id=a30.16><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þórolfr Smior, es fyrr vas geteð, vas son Þorsteins Scrofa, Gríms <anchor id=a30.17>sonar þess es blótenn vas dauðr fyre þokka-sælð, ok kallaðr Camban. <anchor id=a30.18>Son Þórolfs Smiors vas Solmundr, faðer Þórsteins þess es land <anchor id=a30.19>nam í Brynjodale, á miðle Bláskeggs-ár ok Fors-ár<note place=apparatus id=an30.1><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Fors-ár]</ab> Botzar, S.</note>; hann átte <anchor id=a30.20>Þórbi&aolig;rgo Cotlo, dóttor Helga Skarfs, Geirleifs sonar, es nam<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a30.21>Barða-str&aolig;nd; þeirra son vas Refr í Brynjodale, faðer Halldóro, <anchor id=a31.1><pb id=pb31 n=31><note place=margin>[47, 48: i. 15.]</note>es átte Sigfúss Elliða-Gríms son<note place=apparatus id=an31.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>son]</ab> here ends the vell. leaf.</note>; þeirra dótter Þorgerðr, móðer <anchor id=a31.2>Sigfúss, f&aolig;ðor Sæmundar prestz ens Fróða.

<p n=6.8.1><anchor id=a31.3>Nú ero talðer þeir menn es buet hafa í lannáme Ingolfs, vestr <anchor id=a31.4>frá hónom.<note place=apparatus id=an31.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Nú ero ... frá hónom]</ab> add. S.</note>


<p n=7.1><anchor id=a31.5><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Avangr hét maðr Írskr, es bió í Botne fyrstr manna;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a31.6>ok bió þar allan alðr sínn. Þá vas þar svá stórr <anchor id=a31.7>skógr, at hann g&oelig;rðe þar haf-skip af; ok hlóð þar sem nú heiter <anchor id=a31.8>Hlað-hamarr. Hans son vas Þorleifr, faðer Þóríðar, es átte Þormodr <anchor id=a31.9>Þióstars son á Alftanese, ok son Iðunnar Molda-Gnúps<note place=apparatus id=an31.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á Alftanese ... Molda-Gn. d.]</ab> add. S.</note> <anchor id=a31.10>dóttor; þeirra son vas B&aolig;rkr, faðer Þórðar, f&aolig;ðor Auðunnar í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a31.11>Brautar-holte.<note place=apparatus id=an31.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> S here inserts the clause on Colgrim.</note>

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a31.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þormodr enn Gamle ok Cetill Bresa syner fóro af Írlande til <anchor id=a31.13>Íslannz, ok n&aoacute;mo Akranes allt, á miðle Aurriða-ár ok Calmans-ár. <anchor id=a31.14>Þeir vóro Írsker&mdash;Calman vas ok Írskr, es &aoacute;en es við kend, ok <anchor id=a31.15>bió fyrst í Catanese: þeir br&oeacute;ðr skifto l&aolig;ndom með ser, svá at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a31.16>Þormodr átte fyr sunnan Reyne ok til Calmans-ár, ok bió at <anchor id=a31.17>Holme-enom-iðra: en Cetell bróðer hans átte fyr vestan Reyne, <anchor id=a31.18>ok fyr norðan Akra-fell til Aurriða-ár; Berse hét son hans, faðer <anchor id=a31.19>Þórgestz, f&aolig;ðor Starra at Holme, f&aolig;ðor Knattar, f&aolig;ðor Ásdísar, es <anchor id=a31.20>átte Kl&oelig;ingr Snæbiarnar son [?] Hafnar-Orms. Geirlaug vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a31.21>dótter Þormods ens Gamla, móðer Tungo-Oddz.

<pb id=pb32 n=32><note place=margin>[50: i. 16.]</note><p n=7.3><anchor id=a32.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> I&aolig;rundr enn Cristne vas son Cetils Bresa sonar; hann bió <anchor id=a32.2>í I&aolig;rundar-holte&mdash;þat es nú kallat í G&aolig;rðom.&mdash;Hann hélt vel <anchor id=a32.3>Cristne til dauða-dags, ok vas einseto-maðr í elle sínne.  Son <anchor id=a32.4>I&aolig;rundar vas Cleppr, faðer Einars, f&aolig;ðor Narfa. Hávarr hét <anchor id=a32.5>annarr son Clepps, faðer Þórgeirs. Eðna hét dótter Cetels Bresa<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a32.6>sonar; hon vas gift á Írlande þeim manne es Conall hét; þeirra <anchor id=a32.7>son vas Ásolfr Alscic, es í þann tíma fór af Írlande til Íslannz ok <anchor id=a32.8>kom í Austfi&aolig;rðo. Hann kom út austr í Ósom. Hann vas <anchor id=a32.9>Cristenn vel ok vilðe ecke eiga við heiðna menn, ok eige vilðe <anchor id=a32.10>hann þiggja mat at þeim.<note place=apparatus id=an32.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hann kom út ... mat at þ.]</ab> add. S.</note><ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=7.4><anchor id=a32.11><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þeir fóro tolf saman austan þar til es þeir kómo at garðe <anchor id=a32.12>Þórgeirs ens H&aolig;rðzka í Hollte under Eyja-fi&aolig;llom, ok setto þar <anchor id=a32.13>tiald sítt; en f&aolig;ro-nautar hans þrír vóro þá siúker. Þeir &aolig;ndoðosk <anchor id=a32.14>þar&mdash;en Ioan<note place=apparatus id=an32.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Ion, Cd.</note> prestr Þórgeirs son, faðer Gríms í Holte, fann bein <anchor id=a32.15>þeirra, ok flutte til kirkjo&mdash;Síðan g&oelig;rðe Ásolfr ser skála&mdash;því nær<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a32.16>sem nú es kirkjo-hornet at Ásolfs-skála&mdash;at ráðe Þórgeirs, þvi <anchor id=a32.17>at Þórgeirr vilðe þá eige hafa við hús sín.

<p n=7.4.1><anchor id=a32.18>Á féll við skála Ásolfs sialfan&mdash;þat vas &aolig;ndorðan vettr&mdash;&aoacute;en <anchor id=a32.19>varð þegar full með fiskom. Þórgeirr sagðe, at þeir sæte í veiðe-st&aolig;ð <anchor id=a32.20>hans. Síðan fór Ásolfr braut þaðan; g&oelig;rðe annan skála<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a32.21>vestar við aðra &aoacute;&mdash;Sú heiter Ír-&aoacute;, þvi at þeir vóro Írsker&mdash;En es <anchor id=a33.1><pb id=pb33 n=33><note place=margin>[50: i. 16.]</note>menn kómo til árennar, vas hon full með fiskom, sva at slíkt undr <anchor id=a33.2>þóttosk menn eige séð hafa, en brauto vas allt or enne eystre <anchor id=a33.3>&aoacute;nne. Þá r&aoacute;ko héraðs-menn þá braut þaðan; ok fór hann þá <anchor id=a33.4>til ens vestasta skálans. Fór allt á s&aolig;mo leið. B&oeacute;ndr k&aolig;lloðo þá <anchor id=a33.5>fiol-kunga; en Þórgeirr kvezk hyggja at þeir mondo vesa góðer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a33.6>menn. Um váret fóro þeir braut ok vestr á Akra-nes. Hann g&oelig;rðe <anchor id=a33.7>bú at Holme á <corr sic="kirkjo-bólstað" resp=errata>Kirkjo-bólstað</corr>.

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a33.8><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hans sun vas Solve, faðer Þórhildar, es átte Brandr, son <anchor id=a33.9>Þórgríms Ceallacs sonar: þeirra son vas Þórleifr, faðer Bárðar, <anchor id=a33.10>f&aolig;ðor Iófríðar, es átte Arne Torfo son: þeirra dótter Helga, es<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a33.11>átte Arngrímr Goðmundar son.

<p n=7.6><anchor id=a33.12><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> En es Ásolfr eldizk, g&oelig;rðesk hann einseto-maðr. Þar vas <anchor id=a33.13>kofe hans sem nú es kirkjan, þar andaðesk hann, ok vas þar <anchor id=a33.14>grafenn at Holme. En þá es Halldórr, son Illoga ens Rauða, <anchor id=a33.15>bió þar, þá vanðesk fiós-kona ein at þerra f&oeacute;tr sína á þúfo þeirre<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a33.16>es vas á leiðe Ásolfs. Hána dreymðe, at Ásolfr ávítaðe hána um <anchor id=a33.17>þat, es hon þerðe f&oeacute;tr sína saurga á húse hans: &lsquo;En þá mono vit <anchor id=a33.18>s&aoacute;tt,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;ef þú seger Halldóre draum þínn.&rsquo; Hon sagðe <anchor id=a33.19>hónom; ok kvað hann ecke mark á því es konor dreymðe; ok <anchor id=a33.20>gaf ecke gaum at: en es Hroðolfr byskop fór braut or B&oeacute;, þar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a33.21>es hann hafðe buet í munk-lífe xix vettr<note place=apparatus id=an33.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21</ab> <ab type=textRef>í munk-lífe xix vettr]</ab> add. according to Hungrvaka.</note>, þá vóro þar efter munkar <anchor id=a33.22>þrír. Einn þeirra dreymðe, at Ásolfr mælte við hann: &lsquo;Sentú <anchor id=a33.23>húskarl þínn til Halldórs at Holme, ok kaup at hónom þúfo þá, <anchor id=a34.1><pb id=pb34 n=34><note place=margin>[51: i. 16.]</note>es á fiós-g&aolig;to es, ok gef við m&aolig;rk silfrs.&rsquo; Munkrenn g&oelig;rðe svá. <anchor id=a34.2>Húskarlenn gat keypta þúfona, ok gróf síðan i&aolig;rðena, ok hitte <anchor id=a34.3>þar mannz-bein; hann tók upp ok fór heim með. Ena næsto <anchor id=a34.4>nótt efter dreymðe Halldór, at Ásolfr kom at hónom, ok kvezk <anchor id=a34.5>bæðe augo mondo sprengja or hause hónom, nema hann keypte<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a34.6>bein hans slíko verðe sem hann selðe. Halldórr keypte bein <anchor id=a34.7>Ásolfs, ok lét g&oelig;ra at tré-skrín, ok lét setja yfer altare. Halldórr <anchor id=a34.8>sende Illoga son sínn út<note place=apparatus id=an34.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>út]</ab> útan, Cd.</note> efter kirkjo-viðe. En es hann fór útan <anchor id=a34.9>aftr, es hann kom miðle Reykja-ness ok Snæfellz-ness<note place=apparatus id=an34.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Sniofiallz, Cd.</note>, þá náðe <anchor id=a34.10>hann eige fyre stýre-m&aolig;nnom at taka land þar es hann vilðe. Þá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a34.11>bar hann fyr borð kirkjo-viðenn allan, ok bað þar koma sem <anchor id=a34.12>Ásolfr vilðe. En Austmenn kómo vestr í Vaðil<note place=apparatus id=an34.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> iij, Cd.</note>. En þrimr <anchor id=a34.13>nóttom síðarr kom viðrenn á <corr sic="kirkjo-sand" resp=errata>Kirkjo-sand</corr> at Holme; nema tvau <anchor id=a34.14>tré kómo á Raufar-nes á Mýrom. Halldórr lét g&oelig;ra kirkjo ...<note place=apparatus id=an34.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Blank for a word.</note> <anchor id=a34.15>xxx<note place=apparatus id=an34.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>xxx]</ab> i. e. þrítoga.</note>, ok viðe þakða, ok helgaðe Columcilla með Goðe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=7.7><anchor id=a34.16><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Colgrímr enn Gamle,&mdash;son<note place=apparatus id=an34.6><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>son]</ab> om. Cd.</note> Hrolfs hersess ok Unnar Hákonar <anchor id=a34.17>dóttor, Griótgarðz sonar iarls,&mdash;es Griótgarðz-haugr es við kenndr <anchor id=a34.18>fyr sunnan Agða-nes&mdash;fór or Þróndheime til Íslannz, ok nam <anchor id=a34.19>Hvalfiarðar-str&aolig;nd ena nerðre frá Bláskeggs-&aoacute; til Lax-ár, ok út til <anchor id=a34.20>l&oeacute;kjar þess es fellr út frá Saurb&oeacute;; ok bió á Ferstiklo. Hans son<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a35.1><pb id=pb35 n=35><note place=margin>[53: i. 17.]</note>vas Þórhalle, faðer Colgríms, f&aolig;ðor .... steins<note place=apparatus id=an35.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>steins]</ab> .... steins (blank) in Cd.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Cvistz, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a35.2>Cala: Bergþóra vas dótter Colgríms, es átte Refr í Brynjo&shy;dale.

<p n=7.8><anchor id=a35.3><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Finnr enn Auðge, son Halldórs, H&oelig;gna sonar, fór or Stafangre <anchor id=a35.5>til Íslannz: hann átte Þórv&aolig;ro, dóttor Þorbiarnar frá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a35.6>Mosfelle, Hraða<note place=apparatus id=an35.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hraða]</ab> Brannz sonar, Cd.</note> sonar. Hann nam land fyr sunnan Lax-&aoacute; til <anchor id=a35.7>Calmans-ár; hann bió í Miðfelle: hans son vas Þórgeirr, faðer <anchor id=a35.8>Ió-steins<note place=apparatus id=an35.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ió-st.]</ab> S; Holmsteins, Cd., see below, line 20; links seem here to be missing.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Þórunnar .... <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>m. Guðrúnar, m. Sæmundar, <anchor id=a35.9>f. Brandz byscops<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>: Skegge í Skógom vas son Þórunnar, faðer <anchor id=a35.10>Styrmess ok Bolla í Skógom.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=7.9><anchor id=a35.11><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Becan hét maðr, es nam land inn frá Berjadals-&aoacute; til Aurriða-ár, <anchor id=a35.12>ok bió á Becans-st&aolig;ðom í lannáme Cetels.

<p n=7.10><anchor id=a35.13><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Hallkell, es nam Hvítár-síðo, bió fyrstr á Akra-nese á <anchor id=a35.14>Hallkels-st&aolig;ðom, áðr Bresa syner r&aoacute;ko hann braut. En es hann <anchor id=a35.15>fór efter fé síno því es þar hafðe sialf-ala úte genget, vas hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a35.16>drepenn; ok es þar heygðr.

<p n=7.11><anchor id=a35.17><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Hafnar-Ormr fór or Stafangre til Íslannz, ok nam &aolig;ll l&aolig;nd <anchor id=a35.18>um Mela-hverfe út til Aurriða-ár ok Lax-ár, ok inn til Andakíls-ár, <anchor id=a35.19>ok bió í H&aolig;fn. Hans son vas Þórgeirr H&oelig;ggven-kinne, faðer <anchor id=a35.20>Þórunnar, móðor Þórunnar, móðor Ió-steins, <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Sigurðar, f. Biarn-heðins<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a35.21>Þorgeirr H&oelig;ggvinn-kinne<note place=apparatus id=an35.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þorg. H. vas .... gótt]</ab> add. S.</note> vas hirðmaðr Hákonar ko&shy;nongs <anchor id=a36.1><pb id=pb36 n=36><note place=margin>[54, 55: i. 18.]</note>Aðalsteins-fóstra; hann feck á Fitjom kinnar-sár ok orð <anchor id=a36.2>gótt.

<p n=7.12><anchor id=a36.3><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Br&oeacute;ðr tveir bioggo í lannáme Finnz ok Orms, Hroðgeirr <anchor id=a36.4>enn Spake í Saurb&oeacute;, en Oddgeirr at Leir-&aoacute;. En þeir Finnr ok <anchor id=a36.5>Ormr keypto þá braut, þvi at þeim þótte þar<note place=apparatus id=an36.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þar]</ab> S; ser, Cd.</note> þr&oelig;ng-lennt. Þeir<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a36.6>br&oeacute;ðr n&aoacute;mo síðan l&aolig;nd í Floa<note place=apparatus id=an36.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>l&aolig;nd í Floa]</ab> add. S.</note>, Hraungerðinga-hrepp; ok bió <anchor id=a36.7>Þórgeirr í Hraun-gerðe, en Oddgeirr í Oddgeirs-hólom: hann <anchor id=a36.8>átte dóttor Cetels Gufo.

<p n=7.13><anchor id=a36.9><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Hafnar-Ormr es þar heygðr í h&aolig;fðanom framm frá b&oeacute;nom <anchor id=a36.10>í H&aolig;fn, sem hann tók land.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>


<p n=8.1><anchor id=a36.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Ulbr hét maðr, son Brunda-Bialba, ok Hallbero, <anchor id=a36.12>dóttor Ulfs ens Óarga or Hrafnisto: Ulbr átte Sal&shy;bi&aolig;rgo, <anchor id=a36.13>dóttor Berdlo-Kára; hann vas kallaðr Kveld-Ulbr: <anchor id=a36.14>Þórolfr ok Skalla-Grímr vóro syner þeirra. Haraldr konungr <anchor id=a36.15>Hárfagre lét drepa Þórolb norðr í Alost á Sandnese af róge Hildi&shy;ríðar-sona;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a36.16>þat vilde Haraldr konungr eige b&oeacute;ta. Þá bioggo þeir <anchor id=a36.17>Grímr ok Kveld-Ulbr kaup-skip, ok ætloðo til Íslannz, þvi at þeir <anchor id=a36.18>h&aolig;fðo þar spurt til Ingolfs vinar síns. Þeir l&aoacute;go til hafs í Solundom. <anchor id=a36.19>Þar tóko þeir kn&aolig;rr þann es Haraldr konungr lét taka fyre <anchor id=a36.20>Þórolbe, þá es menn hans vóro ný-komner af Englande, ok dr&aoacute;po<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a36.21>þar Hallvarð Harðfara, ok Sigtrygg Snarfara, es því h&aolig;fðo valdet. <anchor id=a37.1><pb id=pb37 n=37><note place=margin>[56: i. 18.]</note>Þar dr&aoacute;po þeir ok sono Guthorms, Sigurðar sonar Hiartar, br&oeacute;ðr&shy;unga <anchor id=a37.2>konongs, ok alla skips-h&aolig;fn þeirra; nema tvá menn es þeir <anchor id=a37.3>léto segja konunge tíðenden. Þeir bioggo hvárt-tveggja skipet til <anchor id=a37.4>Íslannz, ok þriá tige manna á hv&aoacute;ro; stýrðe Kveld-Ulbr því es <anchor id=a37.5>þá vas fenget.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=8.1.1><anchor id=a37.6>Grímr enn Háleyske, Þóres son, Gunnlaugs sonar, Hrolfs sonar, <anchor id=a37.7>Ketils sonar Kiólfara, vas forráða-maðr með Kveld-Ulbe á því <anchor id=a37.8>skipe es hann stýrðe. Þeir vissosk iamnan til í hafino. Ok es <anchor id=a37.9>miok sóttesk hafet, þá tók Kveld-Ulbr sótt. Hann bað þess at <anchor id=a37.10>kisto skylde g&oelig;ra at líke hans, ef hann d&oeacute;e; ok bað svá segja<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a37.11>Gríme syne sínom, at hann t&oeacute;ke skamt þaðan bú-stað á Íslande, <anchor id=a37.12>es kista hans k&oeacute;me á land, ef þess yrðe auðet. Efter þat andaðesk <anchor id=a37.13>Kveld-Ulbr, ok vas skoteð fyr borð kisto hans. Þeir Grímr <anchor id=a37.14>héldo suðr um landet, þvi at þeir h&aolig;fðo spurt, at Ingolbr bygðe <anchor id=a37.15>sunnan á landeno. Siglðo þeir vestr fyr Reykja-nes, ok stefndo<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a37.16>þar inn á fi&aolig;rðenn. Skilðe þá með þeim, svá at hváreger visso <anchor id=a37.17>til annarra. Siglðo þeir Grímr enn Háleyske allt inn á fi&aolig;rðenn, <anchor id=a37.18>þar til es þraut sker &aolig;ll, ok k&aolig;stoðo þar ackerom sínom. En es <anchor id=a37.19>flóð g&oelig;rðe, fluttosk þeir upp í ár-ós einn, ok leiddo þar upp skipet <anchor id=a37.20>sem geck&mdash;Su &aoacute; heiter nú Guf-á&mdash;B&aoacute;ro þeir þar á land f&aolig;ng sín.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a37.21>En es þeir k&aolig;nnoðo landet, þá h&aolig;fðo þeir skamt genget út frá <anchor id=a37.22>skipeno, áðr þeir fundo kisto Kveld-Ulbs rekna í vík eina. Þeir <anchor id=a37.23>b&aoacute;ro hána á þat nes es þar vas, ok hlóðo at grióte.

<pb id=pb38 n=38><note place=margin>[57: i. 19.]</note><p n=8.1.2><anchor id=a38.1>Skalla-Grímr kom þar at lande es nú heiter Knarrar-nes á <anchor id=a38.2>Mýrom. Síðan kannaðe hann landet, ok vas þar mýr-lende <anchor id=a38.3>miket, ok skógar víðer langt á miðle fiallz ok fi&aolig;ro. En es þeir <anchor id=a38.4>fóro inn með firðenom, kómo þeir á nes þat es þeir fundo alfter&mdash;þat <anchor id=a38.5>k&aolig;lloðo þeir Alfta-nes&mdash;þeir létto eige fyrr, an þeir fundo þá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a38.6>Grím enn Háleyska; s&aolig;gðo þeir Gríme allt um ferðer sínar, ok <anchor id=a38.7>svá hver orð Kveld-Ulbr hafðe sent Gríme syne sínom. Skalla-Grímr <anchor id=a38.8>geck til at siá hvar kistan hafðe á land komet; hugðesk <anchor id=a38.9>hónom svá, at skamt þaðan m&oelig;nde vesa ból-staðr góðr. Skalla-Grímr <anchor id=a38.10>vas þar um vettrenn sem hann kom af hafe, ok kannaðe þá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a38.11>allt herað.

<p n=8.1.3><anchor id=a38.12>Hann nam land útan frá Sela-Lóne, ok et &oelig;fra til Borgar-hrauns, <anchor id=a38.13>ok suðr allt til Hafnar-fialla, herat allt svá vítt sem vatn-f&aolig;ll <anchor id=a38.14>deila til sióvar. Hann reiste b&oeacute; hiá vík þeirre es kista <anchor id=a38.15>Kveld-Ulbs kom á land, ok kallaðe at Borg; ok svá kallaðe hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a38.16>fi&aolig;rðenn Borgar-fi&aolig;rð.

<p n=8.1.4><anchor id=a38.17>Síðan skipaðe hann heraðet sínom fél&aolig;gom, ok þar n&aoacute;mo <anchor id=a38.18>marger menn síðan land með hans ráðe.

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a38.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Skalla-Grímr gaf land Gríme enom Háleyska fyr sunnan <anchor id=a38.20>fi&aolig;rð, á miðle Anda-kíls-ár ok Gríms-ár. Hann bió at Hvann-eyre:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a38.21>Ulbr hét son hans, faðer Hrolfs í Geitlande.

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a38.22><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þorbi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an38.1><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> Thorbenus, Spec. Isl. Hist. (Arngrim).</note> Svarte hét maðr: hann keypte land at Hafnar-Orme <anchor id=a38.23>inn frá Sela-eyre, ok upp til Fors-ár. Hann bió á Skelja-brecko; <anchor id=a39.1><pb id=pb39 n=39><note place=margin>[58: i. 20.]</note>hans son vas Þórvarðr, es átte Þórunne, dóttor Þórbiarnar <anchor id=a39.2>or Arnar-holte; þeirra syner vóro þeir Þórarenn Blinde ok Þórgisl<note place=apparatus id=an39.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> -gils, S.</note> <anchor id=a39.3>Orra-skald, es vas með Áláfi Cvaran í Dyflinne.

<p n=8.4><anchor id=a39.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Score, leysinge Cetels Gufu, nam Scora-dal fyr ofan vatn; <anchor id=a39.5>ok vas þar drepenn.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<p n=9.1><anchor id=a39.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Biorn Gollbere nam Reykja-dal-enn-Syðra<note place=apparatus id=an39.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Reykjar-, S.</note>, ok <anchor id=a39.7>bió á Gollbera-st&aolig;ðom; hans son vas Grímkell Goðe <anchor id=a39.8>í Bláskógom; hann átte Signýjo Valbrannz dóttor, Valþiófs sonar; <anchor id=a39.9>þeirra son vas H&aolig;rðr, es vas fyre Holms-m&aolig;nnom. Bi&aolig;rn Gollbere <anchor id=a39.10>átte Liótunne, systor Colgríms ens Gamla: Svarth&aolig;fðe at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a39.11>Reyðar-felle vas annarr son þeirra; hann átte Þórríðe Tungo-Oddz <anchor id=a39.12>dóttor; þeirra dótter Þórdís es átte Guðlaugr enn Auðge: Þióst&shy;olbr <anchor id=a39.13>vas enn þriðe son Biarnar: fiórðe Geirmundr.

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a39.14><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þorgeirr Meldun þá l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll at Birne fyr ofan Gríms-&aoacute;; <anchor id=a39.15>hann bió í Tungo-felle; hann átte Geirbi&aolig;rgo, dóttor Balca or<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a39.16>Hrúta-firðe: þeirra son vas Véleifr enn Gamle.

<p n=9.3><anchor id=a39.17><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Flóke, þræll Gufo, nam Flóka-dal, ok vas þar drepenn.

<p n=9.4><anchor id=a39.18><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Áleifr Hialte hét maðr g&aolig;fogr. Hann kom skipe síno í <anchor id=a39.19>Borgar-fi&aolig;rð, ok vas enn fyrsta vettr með Skalla-Gríme. Hann <anchor id=a39.20>nam land, at ráðe Skalla-Gríms, miðle Gríms-ár ok Geirs-ár, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a39.21>bió at Varma-l&oeacute;k: hans syner vóro þeir, Rage í Laugar-dale, ok <anchor id=a40.1><pb id=pb40 n=40><note place=margin>[60: i. 20.]</note>Þórarenn L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr, es átte Þórdíse, dóttor Áláfs Feilans: <anchor id=a40.2>þeirra dótter Vígdís, es átte Steinn Þórfinnz son: son Raga vas <anchor id=a40.3>Goðþormr<note place=apparatus id=an40.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Goðþormr]</ab> emend.; Guðbonn, S.   Þórnýjar] Þorv<hi rend=sc>n</hi>yar, S.</note>, faðer Gunnvarar, móðor Þórnýjar, móðor Þórlacs, <anchor id=a40.4>f&aolig;ðor Rúnolfs, f&aolig;ðor Þorlacs byscops.

<p n=9.5><anchor id=a40.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Cetell Blundr ok Geirr son hans kómo til Íslannz, ok vóro<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a40.6>með Skalla-Gríme enn fyrsta vettr. Þá feck Geirr Þórunnar, <anchor id=a40.7>dóttor Skalla-Gríms. Um váret efter vísaðe Grímr þeim til landa, <anchor id=a40.8>ok n&aoacute;mo þeir upp frá Flókadals-&aoacute; til Reykjadals-ár; ok tungo þá <anchor id=a40.9>alla upp til Rauðs-gils; ok Flóka-dal allan fyr ofan Breckor: <anchor id=a40.10>Cetell bió í Þróndar-holte<note place=apparatus id=an40.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Trandar-holt, Spec.</note>&mdash;Við hann es kent Blundz-vatn; þar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a40.11>bió hann síðan.

<p n=9.6><anchor id=a40.12><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Geirr enn Auðge, son hans, bió í Geirs-hlíð, en átte annat <anchor id=a40.13>bú at Reykjom enom &oelig;from: hans syner vóro þeir Þórgeirr <anchor id=a40.14>Blundr; ok Blund-Ketell; ok Svart-kell<note place=apparatus id=an40.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Spec.; Svarð-kell, S.</note> á Eyre. Dótter Geirs <anchor id=a40.15>vas Bergdís, es Gnúpr átte, Flóka son, í Hrísom: þeirrar ættar vas<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a40.16>Þóroddr Hrísa-Blundr.


<p n=10.1><anchor id=a40.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <corr sic="Onunðr">Onundr</corr> Breiðskeggr vas son Ulfars, Ulfs <anchor id=a40.18>sonar Fitjom-skeggja, Þóres sonar Hlamanda<note place=apparatus id=an40.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> H&oelig;nsa Þoris, S.; miswritten blaa<hi rend=sc>n</hi>da, S.</note>: <anchor id=a40.19>Onundr nam Tungo alla miðle Hvít-ár ok Reykjadals-ár, ok bió á <anchor id=a40.20>Breiðabólstað. Hann átte Geirlaugo, dóttor Þormodar á Akranese,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a40.21>systor Bersa: þeirra son vas Tungo-Oddr; en Þórodda<note place=apparatus id=an40.5><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Thorrida, Spec.</note> hét dótter <anchor id=a40.22>þeirra; hennar feck Torbi, son Valbrannz, Valþiófs sonar, &OElig;rlygs <anchor id=a41.1><pb id=pb41 n=41><note place=margin>[61: i. 20.]</note>sonar frá Esjo-berge, ok fylgðe henne heiman halbr Breiðaból&shy;staðr <anchor id=a41.2>ok Halsa-land með. Hann gaf Signýjo systor sínne Sig&shy;nýjar-staðe, <anchor id=a41.3>ok bió hon þar.

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a41.4><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Torbe drap Kropps-menn tolb saman: ok hann réð mest <anchor id=a41.5>fyre drápe Holms-manna: ok hann vas á Helliss-fitjom, ok Illoge<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a41.6>enn Svarte, ok Sturla Goðe, þá es þar vóro drepner xviii Helliss-menn: <anchor id=a41.7>en Auðun Smiðcels son brendo þeir inne á Þorvarðz-st&aolig;ðom: <anchor id=a41.8>sonr Torba vas Þórkell at Skáney.

<p n=10.3><anchor id=a41.9><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Tungo-Oddr átte Iórunne Helga dóttor: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro <anchor id=a41.10>þau Þórvaldr, es réð brenno Blund-Cetils; ok Þóroddr es átte<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a41.11>Iófríðe Gunnars dóttor; þeirra dótter Húngerðr, es átte Svertingr <anchor id=a41.12>Hafr-biarnar son. Dótter Tungo-Oddz <hi>vas</hi> Þóríðr, es Þorfinnr <anchor id=a41.13>Sel-Þóris son átte; ok Hallgerðr, es Hallbi&aolig;rn átte, son Oddz frá <anchor id=a41.14>Kiðia-berge.

<p n=10.4><anchor id=a41.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ciolv&aolig;r vas móðor-syster Tungo-Oddz, es bió á Ciolvarar-st&aolig;ðom,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a41.16>móðer Þórleifar, móðor Þóríðar, móðor þeirra Gunn&shy;hildar, <anchor id=a41.17>es Kale<note place=apparatus id=an41.1><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Kole, S.</note> átte; ok Glúms, f&aolig;ðor Þórarens, f&aolig;ðor Glúms <anchor id=a41.18>at Vatnlauso.

<p><anchor id=a41.19>[M&ast;: Kromu-Oddr het maðr ágætr: hann nam Reykjadal enn <anchor id=a41.20>nyrðra, ok alla Tungu á miðle Reykjadals-ár ok Hvít-ár, ok upp til<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a41.21>Deilðar-gils. Hans son vas Onundr es átte Þórlaugo Þórmóðs <anchor id=a41.22>dóttor: þeirra son vas Tungu-Oddr es bió á Breiðabólstað.]

<pb id=pb42 n=42><note place=margin>[62: i. 21.]</note>

<p n=10.5><anchor id=a42.1><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an42.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Here H resumes.</note>Rauðr hét maðr, es nam land upp frá Rauðs-gile til Gilja; ok <anchor id=a42.2>bió at Rauðs-gile. Hans syner vóro þeir Ulfr á Ulfs-st&aolig;ðom; ok <anchor id=a42.3>Auðr á Auðs-st&aolig;ðom fyr norðan &aoacute;, es H&aolig;rðr vá. Ok þaraf <anchor id=a42.4>g&oelig;rðesk Saga Harðar Grímkels sonar ok Geirs.

<p n=10.6><anchor id=a42.5><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Grímr hét maðr, es nam land et syðra upp frá Giljom til<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a42.6>Gríms-gils, ok bió við Gríms-gil. Hans syner vóro þeir Þórgils <anchor id=a42.7>Auga á Auga-st&aolig;ðom; ok Hrane á Hrana-st&aolig;ðom, faðer Gríms <anchor id=a42.8>es kallaðr vas Stafn-Grímr; hann bió á Stafngríms-st&aolig;ðom&mdash;þat <anchor id=a42.9>heiter nú á Sigmundar-st&aolig;ðom. Þar gegnt fyr norðan<corr resp=errata> Hvít-&aoacute; við sialfa</corr> &aoacute;na es <anchor id=a42.10>haugr hans; þar vas hann vegenn.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=10.7><anchor id=a42.11><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þorkell Corna-múle nam Ás enn syðra frá Collz-l&oeacute;k til <anchor id=a42.12>Deilðar-gils, ok bió í Áse: hans son vas Þorbergr Corna-múle, <anchor id=a42.13>es átte Álofo Elliða-ski&aolig;ld, dóttor Ófeigs ok Ásgerðar, systor <anchor id=a42.14>Þorgeirs Gollnes<note place=apparatus id=an42.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> S; Golldins, Cd.</note>: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau Eysteinn ok Hafþóra, es <anchor id=a42.15>átte Eiðr Skeggja son, es síðan bió í Áse&mdash;Þar dó Miðfiarðar-Skegge;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a42.16>ok es þar haugr hans fyr neðan garð. Annarr son <anchor id=a42.17>Skeggja vas Collr es bió at Collz-l&oeacute;k.

<p><anchor id=a42.18>Syner Eiðs vóro Eysteinn ok Illoge.


<p n=11.1><anchor id=a42.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> Ulfr, son Gríms ens Háleyska ok Svanlaugar, dóttor <anchor id=a42.20>Þormodar af Akranese systor Bresa:&mdash;hann Ulfr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a42.21>nam land á miðle Hvít-ár ok Suðr-i&aolig;kla; ok bió í Geitlande. <anchor id=a43.1><pb id=pb43 n=43><note place=margin>[63: i. 21.]</note>Hans syner vóro þeir Hrólfr enn Auðge, faðer Halldóro, es átte <anchor id=a43.2>Gitzorr Hvíte; þeirra dótter Vilborg, es átte Hialte Skeggja son.

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a43.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Annarr son hans vas Hróaldr, faðer Hrólfs ens Yngra, es <anchor id=a43.4>átte Þóríðe Valþjófs dóttor, &OElig;rlygs sonar ens Gamla: þeirra <anchor id=a43.5>b&aolig;rn vóro þau Ceallakr at Lunde í Syðra-dal, f&aolig;ðor Collz, f&aolig;ðor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a43.6>Bergþórs. Annarr vas Solve í Geitlande, faðer Þórðar í <anchor id=a43.7>Reykja-holte.

<p n=11.3><anchor id=a43.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þriðe son Hrólfs vas Illoge enn Rauðe, es fyrst<hi>r</hi> bió í Hrauns-áse; <anchor id=a43.9>hann<note place=apparatus id=an43.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann]</ab> Illogi, S.</note> átte þá Sigríðe, dóttor Þórarens ens Ílla, systor Músa-B&aolig;lverks; <anchor id=a43.10>þann bú-stað gaf hann Bolverk; en Illoge fór þá at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a43.11>bua á Hofs-st&aolig;ðom í Reykjar-dale<note place=apparatus id=an43.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Reykjadal, S.</note>; þvi at Geitlendingar &aoacute;tto at <anchor id=a43.12>halda upp hofe þvi at helminge við Tungo-Odd. Síðarst bió hann <anchor id=a43.13>at Holme-Iðra á Akra-nese; þvi at hann keypte við Holm-Starra <anchor id=a43.14>bæðe l&aolig;ndom ok konom, ok fé &aolig;llo. Þá feck Illoge Iórunnar, <anchor id=a43.15>dóttor Þormodar Þióstars sonar af Alfta-nese. En Sigríðr hengðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a43.16>sik í hofino; þvi at hon vilðe eige manna-kaupen<note place=apparatus id=an43.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> kaupit, S.</note>.

<p n=11.4><anchor id=a43.17><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hrólfr enn Yngre gaf Þórlaugo Gyðjo, dóttor sína, Odda<note place=apparatus id=an43.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Oddi, S.</note> <anchor id=a43.18>Ýrar syne. Því rézk Hrólfr<note place=apparatus id=an43.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hrólfr]</ab> S; hann, Cd. Ballár, S.</note> vestr til Ballar-ár, ok bió þar lenge; <anchor id=a43.19>ok vas kallaðr Hrólfr at Ballar-&aoacute;.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 id=en.lib1 lang=en-UK type=Book rend="display(none)">

<p n=0.1>I. Here beginneth the Book of the Settlements, and there is told in the first chapters the shortest way to Iceland.

<p n=0.2>&ast; In the days when Iceland was found and settled from Norway, Adrianus was pope in Rome, and John, he who was the eighth of that name, in the apostolic see, and Hlodwe [Hlodwig] Hlodwe&apos;s son Kayser north of the Mount [Alps], and Leo and Alexander [Alexios] his son over Mickle-garth [Byzantium]: Harold Fairhair was then king over Norway, and Eiric Eymundsson over Sweeric [Sweden], and Beorn his son, and Gorm [Goth-thorm] the old in Denmark, Elfrad [Ælfræd] the mighty in England and Eatward [Eadweard] his son, and Cearwall [Cearball] at Dyflin [Dublin], Sigrod the mighty Earl at the Orkneys.


<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Wise men say that out of Norway from Stead [Cape Stadt] there be seven days&apos; [24 hours&apos;] sailing west to Horn on the eastward of Iceland.

<p n=1.1.1>But from Snowfellsness, where it is shortest, there is four days&apos; sailing to Cape Wharf in Greenland.

<p n=1.1.2>&ast; From Horn from Norway one must sail ever west to Wharf [Farewell] in Greenland, and then the course sailed is north of Shetland, within sight of land, if there be a very clear day, and south of Faereys, so that the sea be half-way up the slopes, and so to the south of Iceland, so as to get to [that distance from the coast, where you meet] the fowl and whales.

<pb id=pb15a n=15><p n=1.1.3>From Reekness on the southward of Iceland it is eight [MS. three] days&apos; sea to Mare&apos;s leap in Ireland southward.

<p n=1.1.4>And from Longness on the northward of Iceland it is four days&apos; sea to Swal-bard north in Sea-bottom [the Arctic islands and ice-floes].

<p n=1.1.5>And it is one day&apos;s sailing to Greenland out of Colbansey in the north.


<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Gard-here</hi>, the son of Swawar the Sweenish [Swede]; he owned lands in Sealand, but was born in Swee-ric [Sweden]. He journeyed to the Southern isles [Sodor] to get in the inheritance of his wife&apos;s father. But as he was sailing through Petland&apos;s frith [Peht-land-frith <hi>our</hi> Pentland] a gale broke his moorings, and he was driven west into the sea. He made land east of Horn [Cape Horn], there was a haven there then. Gard-here sailed round about the land and found that it was an island. He came upon a frith, which he called the Quaker. Then they put out their boat, and aboard her went Night-fare <corr resp=errata sic="and "></corr>his thrall. Then the moorings broke, and he came ashore in Night-fare&apos;s bay, out east of Scugga-berg [Shadow-rocks]; but Gard-here came ashore on the other side of the frith, and stayed there through the winter, wherefore he called it House-wick. Night-fare stayed behind with his thrall and his bondmaid. Wherefore the place is called Nightfare-wick. Gard-here sailed back East, and praised the land much, and called it <hi rend=sc>Gard-here&apos;s holm</hi>.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Naddodh</hi>, the brother of Oxen-Thori, the brother-in-law of Alwe Bairn-carle. He was a great wicking, wherefore he took up his abode in the Faereys, for he had no place of <pb id=pb16a n=16>good peace elsewhere [he was outlawed everywhere else]. He went out from Norway wishing to go to the islands [Faereys], but he was sea-borne to Gard-here&apos;s holm, and made Reyd-frith in East-friths, and then they walked up the highest mountain to see if they could see any abode of men or smoke, but they saw no token [MS. tidings] thereof. But as they sailed away from the land there fell a great snow, wherefore they called it <hi rend=sc>Snow-land</hi>. They praised the land much.


<p><hi>Parallel Text from Sturla&apos;s-book.</hi>

<!-- Text moved to earlier note on p. 14, following corrigenda. -->

<p><hi>Of Naddodh.</hi>

<p n=2.2.1>It is thus told, that there were certain men who <corr sic="needed to journey" resp=errata>were intending to journey</corr> out of Norway to the Faereys, some name Naddodh the wicking as being one of them. But they were driven west into the sea, and there they found a great land. They walked up a high mountain in the East-friths, and looked far and wide to see if they could see smoke or any token that the land was settled, but they saw none. They went back at harvest-tide to the Faereys, and as they sailed from the land there fell great snow upon the hills, wherefore they called the land Snow-land. They praised the land much.

<p n=2.2.2>The place is now called Reyd-fell in the East-friths, where they came ashore.

<p n=2.2.3>So said priest Sæmund the historian.


<p><hi>Of Gard-here.</hi>

<p n=2.2.4>There was a man whose name was Gard-here Swawarsson, Sweenish [Swedish] by kin; he went to seek Snow-land by the direction of his mother, who had second sight. He made the land east at <hi>Cape</hi> East <pb id=pb17a n=17>Horn. There was then a haven there. Gard-here sailed round about the land, and saw that it was an island. He stayed through the winter in the north at House-wick in the Quaker, and set up a house there. In the spring when he was ready for sea, there was torn from him the boat with a man on board, whose name was Night-fare, and his thrall and bondmaid. He settled there afterwards at a place called Night-fare-wick. Then Gard-here went to Norway and praised the land much.

<p n=2.2.5>He was the father of Une, the father of Hrodgar, the gode <hi>or</hi> priest o&apos; Tongue.

<p n=2.2.6>After that the land was called Gardhere&apos;s Holm, and there was then wood between fell and foreshore. [Here ends the double text.]

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Floci Wilgerdsson was the name of a great wicking. He set out from Roga-land to seek the Snow-land. They lay in Smear-sound. He made ready a great sacrifice, and hallowed three ravens, which were to tell him his way, (for sea-sailors had then no load-stone at that time in the North.) They built a cairn when the sacrifice had been made, and they called it Floce&apos;s beacon <hi>or</hi> cairn. It stands at the place where Horda-land and Roga-land meet. He first went to the Shetlands, and lay in Floce&apos;s voe <hi>or</hi> bay. Then his daughter Gar-hild was lost in Gar-hild&apos;s mere. With Floce there was on board a franklin named Thor-wolf, and another [named] Here-wolf, and Faxe, a South Island-man.

<p>From there Floce sailed to the Faereys, and then he gave his daughter in marriage. From her is come Thrond o&apos; Gate.

<p n=2.3.1>Thence he sailed out to sea with the three ravens which he had hallowed in Norway. But where and when he let loose the first, he flew <pb id=pb18a n=18>back to the bows; the second flew up in the air and back to the ship; the third flew forth from the bows to the quarter where they found the land. They made it on the east at Horn. Then they sailed along the south of the land. But when they sailed west round Reek-ness and the frith began to open, so that they could see Snowfellsness, Faxe said, &lsquo;This must be a big country which we have found; here are great rivers.&rsquo; It was afterwards called Faxe&apos;s mouth <hi>or</hi> oyce. Floce and his men sailed west across the Broad-frith, and then went in towards the land in a frith called Waters-frith or River-frith, over against Bard-strand. The whole frith was full of fish [fish, seals, and whales], and for the sake of the fishing they took no heed to make hay, and all their live stock died in the winter. It was then very cold. Then Floce walked northward to a mountain whence he could see a frith full of sea-ice, [wherefore?] they called the land <hi rend=sc>Iceland</hi>.

<p n=2.3.2>They went away in the summer, and were ready to sail late. &ast; There is still to be seen the enclosure of their hall east of Brian&apos;s-beck, and also their dock, and also their cooking-place.

<p>They could not double Reekness, and there the boat was torn from them, and Here-wolf aboard it. He made land at Here-wolf&apos;s haven. Floce came into Haven-frith. They found a [stranded] whale on an eyre <hi>or</hi> tongue of gravel to the west of the frith, and called the place Whale-eyre. There they met Here-wolf.

<p n=2.3.3>That summer they sailed to Norway. Floce spoke evil of the country. But Here-wolf told the best and the worst of the country, and Thor-wolf said that butter dripped out of every blade of grass in the country that they had found. Wherefore he was called Thor-wolf Butter.


<pb id=pb19a n=19><p>[<hi>Here beginneth what is told of the Settlers.</hi>]

<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a man named Beorn-wolf, and another named Hrod-wald. They were the sons of Hrod-mund Gripsson. They went abroad out of Thela-mark by reason of manslaughter, and took up their abode in Dale-frith at Fiolom. The son of Beorn-wolf was Erne, father of Ing-wolf and Helga, but Hrod-wald&apos;s son was Hrod-mere, father of Laf <hi>or</hi> Leif. Leif&apos;s mother was Hrod-ny, daughter of Cetil Bifra, the son of Horda-Care.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ing-wolf</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Leif</hi>, sworn brethren, went a-warring with the sons of Earl Atle the Slender of Gaula, Ha-stan, Her-stan and Holm-stan, and they were all friendly together. And when they came home they agreed to go forth in fellowship with them another summer. But in the winter the sworn brethren made a feast for the sons of Earl Atle, and at this feast Holm-stan took a vow to get Helga, Erne&apos;s daughter, to wife, and to marry [lit. own] no other woman. Most men misliked this vow, but Leif turned red, and there was little love between him and Holm-stan when they parted at the feast.

<p n=3.2.1>The spring after the sworn brethren got ready to go a-warring, and were minded to go and meet the sons of Earl Atle. They met off Hisa-gable, and Holm-stan and his brother at once began to fight with the sworn brethren. But when they had fought together for awhile, Aul-mod the Old came up, the son of Horda-Care, a kinsman of Leif, and gave help to Ing-wolf and Leif. In this battle fell Holm-stan, but <pb id=pb20a n=20>Her-stan fled. Then Leif and his fellows went a-warring. And in the next winter Her-stan set out with a mind to fall upon Leif and his fellows and slay them, but they got a report of his coming and went to meet him, and they fought a battle and there Her-stan fell. After that men were sent to Earl Atle and Ha-stan to offer terms of peace, and they were set at one on the terms that Leif and his fellows should pay their lands as weregild to Atle and Ha-stan.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And the sworn brethren fitted out a big ship to go and seek the land which Raven-Floce had found, and which was called Iceland. They found the land and stayed in East-friths in South Elfets-frith. They thought the land was better south than north. They were one winter in the land, and then they went back to Norway.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> After this Ing-wolf got all his stock together to go to Iceland, but Leif went on cruising in the West [British Islands]. He harried in Ireland, and found a great earth-house there, and went in there, and it was dark inside till light shone from a weapon which a man was holding. This man Leif slew, and took the sword and much other riches. After this he was called Sword-Leif <hi>or</hi> Heor-leif. Heor-leif harried far and wide in Ireland and got great booty there. Then he took captive ten thralls that were called Duf-thac [Dubh-thach] and Geir-rod, Sceald-beorn, Hall-dor and Draf-drit. There are no more named. After this Heor-leif went to Norway, and there he found Ing-wolf, his sworn brother. He had before this taken to wife Helga, Erne&apos;s daughter, the sister of Ing-wolf.

<pb id=pb21a n=21><p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> That winter Ing-wolf made ready a great sacrifice, and enquired of the oracle as to his coming life or fate; but Heor-leif would never sacrifice. The oracle advised Ing-wolf to go to Iceland. After that each of the brothers-in-law fitted out his ship to go to Iceland. Ing-wolf had on board their common stock, but Heor-leif had his booty. They put to sea when they were ready, and sailed west.

<p n=3.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> That summer in which Ing-wolf and Heor-leif went to settle in Iceland, king Harold Fairhair had been twelve years king in Norway. There was then past from the beginning of this Age and from the time when Adam was created 6073 winters [reckoning AC. to be 5199 AM.], and from the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ 874 winters.

<p n=3.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> They kept company till they saw Iceland; then they were parted. But as soon as Ing-wolf saw land, he pitched his porch-pillars overboard to get an omen, saying as he did so, that he would settle where the pillars should come ashore. Ing-wolf turned to shore at the place which is now called Ing-wolf&apos;s Head. But Heor-leif was driven westward off the land, and he and his men grew short of water. Then the Irish thralls took to the plan of kneading meal and butter together, and they declared that this was a thirst-slake. They called it <hi>minn-thac</hi>. But when this was made ready there came a great rain, and then they caught water on the awnings. And when the <hi>minn-thac</hi> began to grow mouldy they heaved it overboard, and it drifted ashore at the place that is now called Minn-thac&apos;s eyre.

<p n=3.7.1>Heor-leif turned to the shore off Heor-leif&apos;s Head, and there was a <pb id=pb22a n=22>frith there, and the bottom of the frith turned towards the headland. Heor-leif built two halls, and the toft [enclosure] of the one is 18 fathoms and the other 19 fathoms [long]. Heor-leif sat there through the winter.

<p n=3.7.2>But in the spring he wished to sow. He had one ox only, and he made his thralls drag the plough. But when Heor-leif and his men were in the hall, Duf-thac made a plan that the thralls should slay the ox, and say that a bear of the wood had slain it, and then that they should fall upon Heor-leif and his men as they were seeking the bear. And they did so, and told their tale to Heor-leif. And as they went forth to seek the bear, and were scattered through the shaw, the thralls slew every one his man, and murdered them every one. Then they ran away with the women and the stock and the boat. The thralls went out to the islands which they could see in the sea to the south-west, and there they dwelt for some little while.

<p n=3.7.3>Weevil and Carle were the names of Ing-wolf&apos;s thralls: he sent them west along the sea to seek his porch-pillars, but when they came to Heor-leif&apos;s head, they found Heor-leif there dead. Then they went back and told Ing-wolf these tidings, and he was very angry. And afterwards Ing-wolf went west to Heor-leif&apos;s Head, and when he saw Heor-leif dead, he said, &lsquo;It was a pitiful death for a brave man that thralls should slay him, but I see how it goes with those who will never perform sacrifice.&rsquo; Ing-wolf had Heor-leif and his fellows buried, and looked after their ship and share of the stock.

<pb id=pb23a n=23><p n=3.7.4>Then Ing-wolf went up to the headland and saw islands lying in the sea to the south-west. It came into his mind that the thralls must have run away thither, for the boat had disappeared. So he and his men went to seek the thralls, and found them there at a place called Eith [the Tarbet] in the islands. They were sitting at their meat when Ing-wolf fell upon them. They became fearful [panic-stricken], and every man of them ran off his own way. Ing-wolf slew them all. The place is called Duf-thac&apos;s Scaur, where he lost his life. Many of them leaped over the rock, which was afterwards called by their name. The islands were afterwards called the West-men isles whereon they were slain, for they were West-men [Irishmen]. Ing-wolf and his men kept with them the wives of them that had been murdered, and they brought them back to Heor-leif&apos;s head. Ing-wolf was there another winter.

<p n=3.7.5>But in the summer after he went westward along the sea. He was the third winter under Ing-wolf&apos;s fell, west of Aulfus-mere. This season Weevil and Carle found his porch-pillars over against Erne&apos;s knoll down below [west off] the Heath.

<p n=3.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> In the spring Ing-wolf went down over the Heath. He made for himself a homestead at the place where his porch-pillars had come to land. He dwelt in Reek-wick, and the porch-pillars are still there in the parlour [lit. fire-house].

<p n=3.8.1>And Ing-wolf took land in settlement between Aulfus-mere and Whale-frith, west of Brynie-dale, between it and Ax-water, and all the ness to the west. Then said Carle, &lsquo;We went round <hi>or</hi> past good lands in an <pb id=pb24a n=24>ill hour, if we must dwell in this nook of a ness.&rsquo; He ran away and a bondmaid with him.

<p n=3.8.2>Ing-wolf gave Weevil his freedom, and he dwelt at Weevil&apos;s stead. Weevil&apos;s-fell is called after him. He lived a long time, and was a man very well thought of.

<p n=3.8.3>Ing-wolf had a hall built on Scal-fell <hi>or</hi> Hall-fell, and from thence he saw a smoke by Aulfus-mere, and there he found Carle.

<p n=3.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Ing-wolf was the most famous of all the Settlers, for he came here to a desolate land, and was the first to settle the country. And the other Settlers did after his example.

<p n=3.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> He had to wife Hall-weig, Frodi&apos;s daughter, the sister of Lopt the Old. Their son was Thor-stan, who let set the Moot at Keel-ness, before the All-Moot was established. His son was Thor-kell Moon, the Law-speaker, who was of the best conversation of any heathen men in Iceland, of those whom men have records of. He had himself carried out into the rays of the sun in his death-sickness, and commended himself to that God which had made the sun. Moreover he had lived as cleanly as those Christian men who were of the best conversation <hi>or</hi> way of life. His son was Thor-mod, and he was the <hi>gode</hi> <hi>or</hi> priest of the whole congregation when Christendom came to Iceland. His son was Hamall, father of Mar, Thor-mod and Torfe. Sigrod, a son of Mar, was the father of Hamall, the father of Gud-mund, the father of Thor-mod, the <hi>gode</hi> of Skeid.


<pb id=pb25a n=25><p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn Buna</hi> was the name of a mighty and noble herse in Norway. He was the son of Wether-grim, herse <hi>or</hi> lord of Sogn. Grim had to wife Her-ware, daughter of Thor-gerde, daughter of Eylaug, the herse of Sogn [MS. king]. Beorn had to wife We-laug, sister of We-mund the Old. They had three sons. One of them was <hi rend=sc>Cetil Flat-neb</hi>, the second <hi rend=sc>Holgi</hi>, the third <hi rend=sc>Hrapp</hi>. They were noble men, and from them is the greatest race that is told of in this book, and from them are come well-nigh all the gentle-folk of Iceland.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hrapp had to wife Thor-und, the Gr&oelig;nings-r&oelig;pe. Their son was <hi rend=sc>Thord</hi> Sceg [Beard].  He had to wife Wil-borg, daughter of king Os-wald, and Wolf-rune the Unborn, daughter of Ead-mund, king of the English.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Thord dwelt first at Lon in the east [Wash] ten or fifteen winters, but when he heard of his porch-pillars at Lear-voe, then he sold his land to Wolf-liot, who was the son of Thora, Haurda-Care&apos;s daughter; and he [Thord] went west with all that he had, and took land in settlement by the rede <hi>or</hi> under the council of Ing-wolf, between Wolf-here-river and Lear-voe-water, and dwelt afterwards at Sceg-stead <hi>or</hi> Beard-stead. His daughter was Helga, whom Cetil-Beorn the Old o&apos; Moss-fell had to wife. From Thord are come many gentle-folk in Iceland.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> There was a man whose name was <hi rend=sc>Hall</hi>, the son of Thori God-leas, the son of Worm-here, the brother on the father&apos;s side of Hilda Worm-here&apos;s daughter, whom Thor-beorn the Gaul-werish [man o&apos; Gaula] had to wife, but she was sister by her mother to Thord Beard. Hall and his father would not offer sacrifices, but trusted in their own <pb id=pb26a n=26>might. Hall went to Iceland, and took land in settlement by Ing-wolf&apos;s rede, between Mo-gils-water and Lear-voe-water, and dwelt at Mull. His son was Helgi, who had to wife Thurid, Cetil-beorn&apos;s daughter. Their son was Thord o&apos; Alfsness, who had to wife Gud-ny, Raven-kell&apos;s daughter.

<p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Harold Fair-hair harried west over the sea, as it is written in the history of him. He laid under his rule all the Southreys [Sodor], so far west that no king of Norway has ever owned land farther, save king Magnus Barefoot. And when he came from the west, wickings did haunt the islands [Western Islands, especially North British Islands], Scots and Irish, and harried and robbed far and wide. But when king Harold got news of this he sent Cetil Flat-neb, the son of Beorn Buna, west to win back the islands.

<p n=4.5.1>Cetil had to wife Yngw-hild, daughter of Cetil o&apos; Wether, <hi>herse</hi> in Ring-ric. Their sons were these, <hi rend=sc>Boern the Eastern</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Helge Beolan</hi>; <hi rend=sc>Ead the deep o&apos; Wealth</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Thorund Hyrna</hi> were their daughters.

<p n=4.5.2>Cetil went west, but left his son Beorn behind him. He laid under him all the Southreys, and made himself chief over them, but he paid no gild or tax to king Harold as was intended. Then king Harold took as his own all his lands in Norway, and drove his son Beorn abroad.


<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Helge Beolan</hi>, the son of Cetil Flat-neb, went to Iceland from the Southreys. He was with Ing-wolf the first winter, and took at his rede all Keel-ness between Mo-gils-river and Midge-dale-water. He <pb id=pb27a n=27>dwelt at Temple. His sons were Battle-Hrapp and Ey-wind Shelty [Shetlander], father of Col-swegen, father of Ey-wind, who had to wife Thor-laug, Claeng&apos;s daughter. Their daughter was Thor-gerd, mother of Thora, whom Thor-kell, the son of Osgar Cnaf, had to wife. Their son was Ag-mund, father of bishop John the saint [of Holar].


<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aur-lyg</hi> was the name of a son of Hrapp, the son of Beorn Buna. He was in fosterage with bishop Patrec, the saint in the Southreys. A yearning came upon him to go to Iceland, and prayed bishop Patrec that he would give him an outfit. The bishop gave him timber for a church and asked him to take it with him, and a <hi>plenarium</hi>, and an iron church-bell, and a gold penny, and consecrated earth to lay under the corner-posts instead of hallowing the church, and prelates to dedicate the church to Colum-cella [Columba o&apos; the Cells].

<p n=6.1.1>Then spake bishop Patrec: &lsquo;Wheresoever thou turnest in to land, dwell only there where three fells can be seen from the sea and a frith running between each fell, and a dale in each fell. Thou shalt sail to the furthest [southernmost]; there shall be a shaw there, and further south under the fell thou shalt light on a clearing and three stones raised or set up there. Do thou raise thy church and homestead there.&rsquo;

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Aur-lyg put to sea, and in a second ship with him a man named Coll, his sworn brother. They kept company out. On board Aur-lyg&apos;s ship was a man whose name was Thor-beorn Sparrow; another called Thor-beorn Talcni; the third, Thor-beorn Scuma. They were the <pb id=pb28a n=28>sons of Bead-were Bladder-pate. But when they came where they might look out for the land, there arose a great storm against them, and drove them west about Iceland. Then Aur-lyg called upon bishop Patrec, his foster-father, to bring them ashore, and [vowed] that he would give the place a name after his name wherever he should first come ashore. And after that they were but a little while ere they got to land; and he brought his ship in to Aurlyg&apos;s haven, and called the frith Patrec&apos;s frith therefore. But as for Coll he called upon Thor <hi>or</hi> Thunder. They were parted in the storm, and he reached the place called Colls-wick, and there his ship was wrecked. His crew got to land some of them, and shall be told after.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And in the spring Aur-lyg fitted out his ship, and sailed away with all that he had; and when he came south off Faxes-mouth, he saw the fells that had been spoken of to him, and knew them. And then the iron bell fell overboard and sunk in the sea. But they sailed in along the frith, and went in to the land at the place that is now called Sand-wick on Keel-ness, and there lay the iron bell in the sea-weed.

<p n=6.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Aur-lyg took up his abode at Esia-rock [Clay-rock], by the rede of Helge Beolan his kinsman, and took land in settlement between Mo-gils-river and Os-wif&apos;s becks. He built a church at Esia-rock, as was commanded him.

<p>Help was the name of his wife. Their son was Wal-theow, who came to Iceland a full-grown man with Aur-lyg. Afterward Aur-lyg had to wife Is-gerd, daughter of Diarmaid Bresesson. Their son was Gar-mund, father of Hall-dora, whom Theost-wolf, the son of Beorn <pb id=pb29a n=29>Gold-bearer, had to wife. Their son was Thor-laf, who dwelt at Esia-rock after Gar-mund, his mother&apos;s father. They put their trust in Colum-cille, though they were unbaptized. Thor-laf was possessed by a troll, yet he took Christendom; from him are many men come. &ast; From him are the <hi rend=sc>Esbergings</hi> come. The daughter of Aur-lyg the Old and Is-gerd was We-laug, whom Gund-laug Worm&apos;s-tongue the Elder had to wife, and their daughter was Thurid Dylla, the mother of Illugi the Black.

<p n=6.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> There was a man named Swart-cell [<hi rend=sc>Cathal Dubh</hi>]. He went from Caithness to Iceland, and took land in settlement inside Midge-dale-water, and between it and Eilif&apos;s-dale-water, and dwelt at Kid-fell first, and afterwards at Eyre. His son was Thor-kell, father of Glum, the man that took Christendom when he was already old. He was wont thus to pray before the cross: &lsquo;Good be with the old ever! Good be with the young ever!&rsquo; His son was Thorarin, the father of Glum o&apos; Waterlease. Arn-leif <hi>or</hi> Erne-laf was the name of Swart-cell&apos;s sister, whom Thor-wolf Wili-gisl, the father of Clamp-iron the Old of Floce&apos;s-dale, had to wife. Their daughter was Hall-gerd, whom Berg-thor, Coll&apos;s son, had to wife.

<p n=6.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wal-theow</hi>, who was spoken of before, the son of Aurlyg o&apos; Esia-rock; he took in settlement all Ceos, and dwelt at Middle-fell. Thor-beorn Coll was the name of his son, the father of Hall-weig, whom Thord lamb had to wife. That is the kin of the <hi>Waltheowings</hi>. Sig-ny was the name of a daughter of Wal-theow, after whom Signy-stead is called. Grim-kell, the son of Beorn Gold-bearer, had her to <pb id=pb30a n=30>wife. Their sons were these: Haurd, who was slain in Gar&apos;s-holm, and Gnup [Crag], the father of Birning, the father of Gnup, the father of Eiric the Greenlandmen&apos;s bishop. Wal-brand was the name of another son of Wal-theow, [he was] the father of Torfe, who first dwelt in Madder-field. He and his father made a fellowship with Ord o&apos; Tongue, according to which they dwelt afterwards at Broad-bowster in Northern Reek-dale. Torfe was the father of Thorkel-o&apos;-Scaney, who had to wife Arn-gerd, daughter of Thor-kell, son of Cathal Dubh.

<p n=6.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thore o&apos; Hwam</hi> took land in settlement between Lax-water and Force-water, and dwelt at Hwam. He had a feud with Ref [Fox] the Old about a cow, was called Byrnie, after whom Byrnie-dale is called. This heifer Thore had long lost, and she was found in Byrnie-dale on land which Ref owned, and forty head of neat with her, which were all come from her, and they had gone about out of doors finding their own fodder. Each of them claimed the cattle, but Thore fell before Ref and with him eight men, when they fought by the hillocks which were afterwards called Thore&apos;s hillocks.

<p n=6.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf Butter</hi>, who was spoken of before, was the son of Thor-stan Scrofa, the son of Grim, to whom sacrifices were made after he was dead on account of the love men bore him, and he was called Camban.  The son of Thor-wolf Butter was Sol-mund, father of Thor-stan, who took land in settlement in Byrnie-dale, between Blue-shaw-water and Force-water.  He had to wife Thor-berg Catla, daughter of Helge Scarf, the son of God-laf, who took in settlement Bard-strand. Their son was Ref o&apos; Byrnie-dale, the father of Hall-dora, <pb id=pb31a n=31>whom Sigfus Ellida-Grimsson had to wife. Their daughter was Thor-gerd, mother of Sigfus, father of priest Saemund the Wise.

<p n=6.8.1>Now are told up those men who settled in the settlement of Ing-wolf westward from him.


<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a man whose name was Aawang, an Irishman, the first man that dwelt at Bottom, and he dwelt there all his life. There was then so great a shaw there that he built a ship out of it, and loaded her at a place that is now called Lathe-hammer <hi>or</hi> Loading-rock. His son was Thor-laf, the father of Thurid, whom Thor-mod, Thiost-here&apos;s son o&apos; Elfetsness, and Id-wen Mold-Gnup&apos;s daughter, had to wife. Their son was Borc, the father of Thord, the father of Eadwin o&apos; Road-holt.

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-mod</hi> [<hi>pr.</hi> <hi rend=sc>Diarmaid</hi>] the Old and <hi rend=sc>Cetil</hi> [<hi>pr.</hi> <hi rend=sc>Cathal</hi>], Brese&apos;s son, went from Ireland to Iceland and took in settlement all Acre-ness between Trout-water and Colman&apos;s river. They were Irish. <hi rend=sc>Colman</hi> was also Irish, after whom the river is named, and he dwelt first at Caith-ness [in Iceland]. These brethren exchanged land with each other, so that Diarmaid owned [all] south of Rowan and up to Colman&apos;s river, and dwelt at the inner Holm. But Cathal, his brother, owned [all] from the west of Rowan, and north of Acre-fell to Trout-water. His son was named Berse [i.e. Brese], the father of Thor-gest, the father of Starre o&apos; Holm, the father of Cnatt, the father of Asdis, whom Claeng, Snae-beorn&apos;s son, the [father] of Haven-worm, had to wife. Gar-laug was the daughter of Thor-mod the Old [and] the mother of Ord o&apos; Tongue.

<pb id=pb32a n=32><p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eor-wend the Christian</hi> was the son of Cathal, Brese&apos;s son. He dwelt at Eor-wends-holt, which is now called Garth. He kept well to Christendom to the day of his death, and was a hermit <hi>or</hi> solitary in his old age. The son of Eorwend was Clepp <hi>or</hi> Clemp, the father of Einar, the father of Narfe. Ha-were was the name of another son of Clepp; [he was] the father of Thor-gar. Ethna, <hi>or</hi> Aithne, was the name of the daughter of Cathal, Brese&apos;s son. She was given in marriage in Ireland to a man named Conall. Their son was As-wolf Al-scic, who at that time went from Ireland to Iceland, and came to land in the East-friths to Oyce. [He was a kinsman of Eor-wend of Garth, and was a Christian man, and would not have anything to do with heathen men, and would not receive meat of them.]

<p n=7.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> They went twelve together from the East until they came to the house of Thor-gar the Haurd at Holt under Eyfell, and there they pitched their tent, but three of his fellows fell sick and died there; but priest John Thorgarsson, the father of Grim of Holt, found their bones and translated them to the church. Afterwards As-wolf made him a hall near to where the tower of the church now is at <corr sic="East " resp=errata></corr>As-wolf&apos;s-hall<corr sic=" under Eyfell" resp=errata></corr>, by the counsel of Thor-gar. For Thor-gar would not have them in his house.

<p n=7.4.1>A river ran by the very hall of As-wolf. It was about the beginning of the winter; the river was then full of fish. Thor-gar said that they were fishing in his fishery. Then As-wolf went away and made another hall to the west by another river, which was called the Irishman&apos;s River, for they were Irish. But when men came to the river it was full of <pb id=pb33a n=33>fish, so that men thought such a wonder had never been seen, but all those that were in the eastern river were gone. Then the men of that part drove them away thence, and As-wolf went to the western hall [the most westerly of the three of As-wolf&apos;s halls]. And then all went the same way; the franklins accused them of magic, but Thor-gar said that he thought they must be good men. In the spring As-wolf and his men went away west to Acre-ness, and he set up housekeeping in Holm at Kirk-bowster.

<p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> His son was Solve, the father of Thor-hilda, whom Brand, the son of Thor-grim, Ceallac&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son was Thor-laf, father of Bard, father of Io-frid, whom Arne, Torwe&apos;s son, had to wife. Their daughter was Helga, whom Arn-grim Godmundsson had to wife.

<p n=7.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> But when As-wolf began to grow old he became a solitary <hi>or</hi> hermit. His cell was where the church now stands, and there he died, and was buried there at Holm. But when Hall-dor, the son of Illugi the Red, dwelt there, one of the cow-girls was wont to wipe her feet on the hummock that was over As-wolf&apos;s tomb. She dreamed that As-wolf warned her not to wipe her dirty feet in his house. &lsquo;Nevertheless we will be good friends [lit. reconciled] if thou will tell Hall-dor thy dream.&rsquo; She told it him, but he said that it was no matter what women dreamed, and paid no heed to it. But when bishop Rod-wolf went abroad from By, where he had dwelt 19 winters in the life of a monk, there were three monks left behind him. One of them dreamed that As-wolf had said to him, &lsquo;Do thou send thy housecarl to Hall-dor at Holm, and <pb id=pb34a n=34>buy of him the hummock that is at the cowbyre-path, and give him a mark of silver for it.&rsquo; The monk did so. The housecarl bought the hummock and then dug in the earth there, and found a man&apos;s bones. He took them up and carried them home with him. But the next night after Hall-dor dreamed that As-wolf came to him and told him, that he would make both his eyes leap out of his head unless he bought his bones at the same price that he sold the hummock. So Hall-dor bought As-wolf&apos;s bones, and had a shrine of wood made, and set it over the altar. Hall-dor sent his son Illugi abroad to get timber for a church, but as he was coming back, when he got between Reek-ness and Snowfell&apos;s-ness, he was not able, by reason of the mates, to land where he wished. So he cast overboard all the church timber, and bade it go where As-wolf wished; but the East-men brought their vessel up at Waddle. But three nights later the timber came ashore on Kirk-sand at Holm, save two trunks that came ashore at Rauf-ness in the Mire <hi>or</hi> Fen. Hall-dor had a church built [blank] 30 ells long, and thatched with wood, and hallowed it to Colum-cilla and God.

<p n=7.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Col-grim the Old</hi>, [son] of Hrod-wulf, the herse <hi>or</hi> lord, and of Unna, daughter of Hacon, the son of Earl Grit-garth, after whom Grit-garth&apos;s howe, south of Agda-ness, is called, went out of Throwendham to Iceland, and took in settlement Nether Whale-frith-strand from Blue-shaw-water to Lax-water, and out to the brook that falls out from Sourby, and dwelt at Four-horn. His son was Thor-hall, the father of <pb id=pb35a n=35>Col-grim, the father of [blank]-stan, the father of Cwist, the father of Cale. Berg-thora was a daughter of Col-grim, whom Ref o&apos; Brynie-dale had to wife.

<p n=7.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Finn the Wealthy</hi>, the son of Hall-dor, Hægene&apos;s son, came out of Stafanger to Iceland. He had to wife Thor-ware, daughter of Thor-beorn of Mosfell, the son of Hrad [MS. Brand]. He took land in settlement from the south of Lax-water to Calman&apos;s river. He dwelt at Midfell. His son was Thor-gar, the father of Holm-stan, the father of Thor-und .... Sceg <hi>or</hi> Beardie o&apos; Shaw was the son of Thor-un, and the father of Styrmi and of Bolle o&apos; Shaw.

<p n=7.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Becan</hi> [little] that took land in settlement inward from Borg-dale-water to Trout-water, and dwelt at Becan-stead in the settlement of Cetil.

<p n=7.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hall-kell</hi>, that took in settlement White-river-side, dwelt first in Acre-ness at Hall-kell-stead, before the sons of Brese drove him abroad, and when he went after his cattle, that were out of doors finding their own fodder, he was slain, and he is &lsquo;howed,&rsquo; <hi>or</hi> laid in the barrow there.

<p n=7.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Haven-worm</hi> came out of Stafanger to Iceland, and took in settlement all the land round Mell-wharf west to Trout-water and Lax-water and east to Duck-kyle-water, and dwelt at Haven. His son was Thor-gar Hewn-cheek, the father of Thor-unn, the mother of Thor-unn, the mother of Iostan, the father of Sigurd, the father of Beorn-hedin. Thor-gar Hewn-cheek was a henchman of king <pb id=pb36a n=36>Hacon, Ethelstan&apos;s foster-son. &lsquo;At Fitia he won his wound and a good renown.&rsquo;

<p n=7.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Two brethren dwelt in the settlement of Finn and Worm, <hi rend=sc>Hrodgar</hi> the Sage in Sowerby, and Ord-gar at Lear-water; but Finn and Worm brought them out, for they thought they were crowded there. The brethren afterwards took in settlement Floe in <hi>Rawn-gerding-Rape</hi>, and Thor-gar dwelt in Rawn-garth, and Ord-gar at Ord-gar&apos;s-hill. He had to wife a daughter of Cathal-gowe.

<p n=7.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Haven-worm is howed there on the headland in front of the homestead in Haven, where he first came to land.


<p>[<hi>The text taken from Sturla&apos;s-book.</hi>]

<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Wolf</hi>, the son of Brund-Belfe and of Hall-bera, daughter of Wolf, the lion of Raven-ist. Wolf had to wife Sal-borg, daughter of Berdla-care. He was called <hi rend=sc>Qweld-wolf</hi> [Evening-wolf]. Thor-wolf and <hi rend=sc>Scalla-grim</hi> were their sons. King Harold Fairhair had Thor-wolf slain north in Alost on Sand-ness, <corr sic="out of a feud with" resp=errata>through a false charge made by</corr> the sons of Hild-rid. King Harold would not pay weregild for him. Then Grim and Qweld-wolf fitted out a merchant ship, having a mind to go to Iceland, for they had heard news thereof from Ing-wolf their friend. They lay ready for sea in Solund, and there they took the cog which king Harold had had taken from Thor-wolf when his men were just come from England, and they slew there Hall-ward Hard-farer and Sig-tryg Fast-farer, who were in command of her. They <pb id=pb37a n=37>also slew the son of Guth-thorm, the son of Sigrod Hart, the first cousin of the king, and all the ship&apos;s crew save two men, whom they sent to tell the king the tidings. Each of them made his ship ready to go to Iceland, and thirty men aboard of each. Qweld-wolf commanded the one which they had taken there.

<p n=8.1.1><hi rend=sc>Grim</hi>, the Haleygoman, the son of Thori, the son of Gund-laug, the son of Hrod-wolf, the son of Cetil Keel-farer, was captain with Qweld-wolf of the ship that he commanded. They kept within ken of each other at sea, but when they had gone over a great space of sea, Qweld-wolf fell ill, and he ordered that they should make a coffin for his body if he should die, and bade them tell his son Grim that he should set up his homestead in Iceland a little way from the place where his coffin should come to land, if it was so fated. After that Qweld-wolf died, and his coffin was cast overboard. Grim and his men sailed to the south of the land, for they had heard that Ing-wolf dwelt in the south of the land. They sailed westward past Reek-ness, and stood in up the frith. Then they parted company, so that neither was within ken of the other. Grim the Haleygoman and his fellows sailed right up the frith till they had cleared all the reefs, and then cast anchor. But when the flood served they moved up into a river-mouth, and there berthed their ship as far as they could float her. This river is now called Gowe-water. Then they brought their goods ashore. But when they explored the land, they had gone but a short way west from the ship ere they found Qweld-wolf&apos;s coffin drifted into a bay. They carried it up to the ness that was there, and heaped a pile of stones over it.

<pb id=pb38a n=38><p n=8.1.2>Scald-Grim came ashore at the place that is now called Cog-ness in the Mire <hi>or</hi> Fen. Afterwards he explored the land, and there was a great fen-land and broad shaws, far between fell and foreshore, and when they journeyed inward along the frith they came on a ness where they found wild swans, wherefore they called it Elfets-ness [Wild-swan&apos;s-ness]. They did not stop till they met Grim the Haleygoman. They told Grim all about their journey, and also what message Qweld-wolf had given to his son. Scald-Grim went to see where the coffin had come ashore, and he made up his mind that there was a likely place for a homestead a little way therefrom. He stayed there through the winter he came over sea, and explored all the country.

<p n=8.1.3>He took in settlement the land outward from Seal-wash and up to Borg-raun and all south to Haven-fell, the whole country side as far as the rivers run to the sea. He reared him a homestead beside the bay where Qweld-wolf&apos;s coffin came to land and called it Borg, moreover he called the frith Borg-frith.

<p n=8.1.4>Then he shared out the country to his fellows, and many men took land in settlement there at his rede.

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Scald-Grim gave land to <hi rend=sc>Grim the Haleygoman</hi> on the south of the frith, between Duck-kyle&apos;s-water and Grim&apos;s-river. He dwelt at Whan-eyre [Angelica-eyre].  The name of his son was Wolf, the father of Hrodulf o&apos; Goat-land.

<p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn the Swarthy</hi> was the name of a man who bought land of Haven-worm inside of Seal-eyre and up to Force-water. He <pb id=pb39a n=39>dwelt at Sheel-brink. His son was Thor-ward, who had to wife Thor-unn, the daughter of Thor-beorn o&apos; Erne-holt. Their sons were these: Thor-arin the Blind and Thor-gils, Orri&apos;s poet, who was with Anlaf Cuaran in Dyflin [Dublin].

<p n=8.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Scorre, a freedman of Cathal-gowe, took in settlement Scorres-dale above the river, and was slain there.


<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn Gold-bearer</hi> took in settlement South Reek-dale, and dwelt at Gold-bearer-stead. His son was Grim-kell, <hi>gode</hi> at Blue-Shaw. He had to wife Sig-ny, daughter of Wal-brand Wall-theowsson. Their son was Haurd, who was the leader of the <hi rend=sc>Men o&apos; Holm</hi>. Beorn Gold-bearer had to wife Leot-unn, sister of Col-grim the Old. Swart-head [Ceann-dubh] of Reyd-fell was another of their sons. He had to wife Thurid, daughter of Ord o&apos; Tongue. Their daughter [was] Thor-dis, whom Gud-laugh the Wealthy had to wife. Theost-wolf was the third son of Beorn; the fourth was Gar-mund.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thorgar Mel-dun</hi> [Mael-duine] received all his land from Beorn down from Grim&apos;s-river. He dwelt at Tongue-fell. He had to wife Gar-borg, daughter of Balcan <hi>or</hi> Balce of Ram-fell. Their son [was] We-laf the Old.

<p n=9.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Floce, a thrall of Cetil Gowe, took Floce-dale and was slain there.

<p n=9.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Auleif Shelty</hi> was the name of a gentle-born man that came in his ship to Borg-frith, and was the first winter with Scald-Grim. He took land in settlement by rede of Scald-Grim, between Grim&apos;s-river and Gar&apos;s-river, and dwelt at Warm-beck. His sons were these: Ragi of Bath-dale and Thorarin the Law-speaker, who had to wife <pb id=pb40a n=40>Thordis, daughter of Anlaf Feilan. Their daughter [was] Wig-dis, whom Stan Thor-finsson had to wife. The son of Ragi was Guth-thorm, father of Gund-ware, mother of Thor-ny, mother of Thor-lac, father of Run-wolf, father of bishop Thor-lac.

<p n=9.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil Blund</hi> [Cathal?] and <hi rend=sc>Gar</hi> his son came to Iceland, and were with Scald-Grim the first winter. Then Gar took to wife Thor-unn, Scald-Grim&apos;s daughter. In the spring after Grim showed them land, and they took in settlement up from Floce-dale-river to Reek-dale-water, and the tongue right up to Red-gill, and all Floce-dale down from the Brinks. Cetil dwelt at Throwend-holt. Blunds-mere is called after him, and there he dwelt afterwards.

<p n=9.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Gar the Wealthy, his son, dwelt at Gars-lithe, and he had another house at Upper Reeks. His sons were these: Thor-gar Blund and Blund-Cetil and Cathal-dubh o&apos; Eyre; Gar&apos;s daughter was Berg-dis, whom Gnup Flocesson of Bush had to wife. Of their kin was Thor-ord Bush-Blund.


<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>An-wend Broad-beard</hi> was the son of Wolf-here, the son of Wolf Fitia-beardie, the son of Thori-hlammandi [thumper]. An-wend took in settlement all Tongue between White-water and Reek-dale-water, and dwelt at Broad-bowster. He had to wife Gar-laug, daughter of Diarmaid of Acre-ness, the sister of Bersi [Bresi]. Their son was Ord o&apos; Tongue, but Thor-orda was the name of their daughter. Torfi the son of Wal-brand, the son of Wal-theow, the son of Aurlyg of Esia-rock, took her to wife, and there went hence with her [as a marriage <pb id=pb41a n=41>portion] half Broad-bowster and Neck-land also. He gave his sister Signy Signy-stead, and there he dwelt.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Torfi</hi> slew the Men o&apos; Cropp, twelve together; and he was the chief leader at the slaying of the Men o&apos; Holm, and he was at Cave-fitia with Illugi the Swarthy and Sturla Gode when there were slain there eighteen of the Cave Men, but they burnt Eadwin Smith-cell&apos;s [Cathal Gobha?] son in the house at Thor-ward-stead. Torfi&apos;s son was Thor-kell of Scaney.

<p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ord o&apos; Tongue</hi> had to wife Thor-unn, Helgi&apos;s daughter. Their children were these: Thor-wald, who was the leader at the burning of Blund-Cetil, and Thor-ord, who had to wife Io-frid, Gunhere&apos;s daughter. Their daughter [was] Hungerd, whom Swarting Hafr-beornsson had to wife. The daughters of Ord o&apos; Tongue were Thor-id, whom Swart-head [Cenn-dubh] had to wife, and Io-frid, whom Thor-fin Seal-Thorisson had to wife, and Hall-gerd, whom Hall-bern, the son of Ord o&apos; Kid-rock, had to wife.

<p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ceol-ware</hi> was the mother&apos;s sister of Ord o&apos; Tongue, who dwelt in Ceol-ware-stead, the mother of Thor-laf, the mother of Thor-rid, the mother of Gund-hild, whom Cale had to wife, and of Glum, the father of Thor-arin, the father of Glum of Water-lease.

<p>[M: Double text to ch. 10. 1.] Crum-Ord was the name of a nobleman that took in settlement North Reek-dale and all the tongue between Reek-dale-water and White-water and up to the Parting-gill. His son was Ean-wend, who had to wife Thor-laug, Thor-mod&apos;s daughter. Their son was Ord o&apos; Tongue, who dwelt at Broad-bowster. [Here ends the double text.]


<pb id=pb42a n=42><p>[<hi>Now Hawk&apos;s-book again.</hi>]

<p n=10.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Red</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement up from Red-gill to Gills, and dwelt at Red-gill. His sons were these: Wolf of Wolf-stead and Ead of Ead-stead, on the north of the river, whom Haurd slew in fight, and therefrom beginneth the <hi>History of Haurd Grim-kellsson and Gar</hi>.

<p n=10.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Grim</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement southerly up from Gills to Grims-gill, and dwelt at Grims-gill. His sons were these: Thor-gils Eye of Eye-stead, and Ranig at Ranig-stead, the father of Grim, that was called Stem-Grim or Bows-Grim. He dwelt at Stem-Grim-stead, which is now called Sigmund-stead. Over against, north of White-water beside the river itself, is his howe, where he was slain.

<p n=10.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-kell Corna-mule</hi> took in settlement the South Oyce from Colls-beck to Parting-gill, and dwelt at Oyce. His son was Thor-berg Corna-mule, who had to wife An-lof Ellidis-shield, the daughter of Unfey and Ans-gerd, sister of Thorgar Goldin <hi>or</hi> Goldne [i. e. the One-eyed]. Their children were these: Ey-stan and Haf-thora, whom Aed Sceg-son had to wife, who afterwards dwelt at Oyce, where Mid-frith Sceg died, and there his howe is down below the garth. Another of Sceg&apos;s sons was Coll, who dwelt at Colls-beck.

<p>Aed&apos;s sons were Ey-stan and Illugi.


<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wolf</hi>, the son of Grim the Haleygoman, and of Swan-laug, daughter of Diarmaid of Acre-ness, and sister of Bresi. This Wolf took land in settlement between White-water and South-Iockle, and <pb id=pb43a n=43>dwelt in Goat-land. His sons were these: Rod-wolf the Wealthy, the father of Hall-dora, whom Gizor the White had to wife. Their daughter [was] Wil-borg, whom Shelty Scegsson had to wife.

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Another son of his was Hrod-wald, father of Hrod-wolf the Younger, who had to wife Thur-id, daughter of Wal-theow, the son of Aurlyg the Old. Their children were these: Ceallac of Lund in Suther-dale, the father of Magnus, the father of Coll, the father of Berg-thor. Another was Solwi o&apos; Goat-land, the father of Thord of Reek-holt.

<p n=11.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> The third son of Hrod-wolf was Illugi the Red, who first dwelt at Rawn&apos;s-oyce. He had to wife then Sigrid, daughter of Thorarin the Wicked, and sister of Mouse-Bale-werk. Illugi gave Bale-werk this homestead, and went to dwell at Temple-stead in Reek-dale, for all the <hi rend=sc>Goatlandmen</hi> had to maintain half the temple, and Ord o&apos; Tongue the other half. And lastly, he dwelt at Inner Holm on Acre-ness; for he changed lands and wives and all their stock with Holm-Starri; then Illugi took to wife Thorund, daughter of Thor-mod, Thiost-here&apos;s son of Elfet&apos;s-ness, but Sigrid hanged herself in the temple because she would not change husbands.

<p n=11.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hrod-wolf the Younger gave Thor-laug the priestess, his daughter, to Ord, Yri&apos;s son, wherefore he went west to Ballar-water and dwelt there long, and was called Hrod-wolf of Ballar-water.



</div3>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb44 n=44>
<div3 lang=is type=Book id=lib2 n=II rend="align-with(en.lib2)">
<head>LIB. II.</head>

<p n=0.1><anchor id=a44.1><note place=margin>[64, 65: ii. 1.]</note>Her hefr upp landn&aoacute;m í <hi rend=sc>Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge</hi>, es mart stór-menne <anchor id=a44.2>hefer bygðan<note place=apparatus id=an44.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bygðan]</ab> S; bygt, Cd.</note>.


<p n=1.1><anchor id=a44.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Maðr hét Calman Suðreyskr<note place=apparatus id=an44.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Suðreyskr]</ab> at ætt, add. S.</note>; hann fór til Íslannz, ok <anchor id=a44.4>kom í Hvalfi&aolig;rð, ok sat við Calmans-&aoacute; um vetrenn. <anchor id=a44.5>Þar drucknoðo syner hans tveir á Hvalfirðe: en síðan nam hann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a44.6>land fyr vestan Hvít-&aolig;, miðle ok Flióta, Calmans-tungo alla, ok <anchor id=a44.7>svá allt austr under i&aolig;kla sem gr&aolig;s ero vaxen, ok bió í Calmans-tungo. <anchor id=a44.8>Hann drucknaðe í Hvít-&aoacute;, es hann hafðe faret suðr í <anchor id=a44.9>Hraun, at hitta friðlo<note place=apparatus id=an44.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> frillo, Cd.</note> sína: ok es haugr hans á Hvítár-bakka fyr <anchor id=a44.10>sunnan. Hans son vas Sturla Goðe, es fyrst bió á Sturlo-st&aolig;ðom<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a44.11>upp under Tungo-felle upp frá Skald-skelmis-dale; en síðan bió <anchor id=a44.12>hann í Calmans-tungo. Hans son vas Biarne, es deilðe við Hrólf <anchor id=a44.13>enn Yngra ok sono hans um Tungo&apos;na-Lítlo. Þá hét Biarne at <anchor id=a44.14>taka Cristne. Efter þat braut Hvít-&aoacute; út far-veg þann es nú fellr <anchor id=a44.15>hon. Þá eignaðesk Biarne Tungo&apos;na-Lítlo ofan um Grindr ok<note place=apparatus id=an44.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> ok ofan um Gr. ok Solmundar-hofða, S.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a44.16>Solmundar-h&aolig;fða.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a44.17><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Cylan hét bróðer Calmans; hann bió fyr neðan Collz <anchor id=a44.18>hamar: hans son vas Care es deilðe við Karla Conals son á <anchor id=a44.19>Karla-st&aolig;ðom, leysingja Hrólfs or Geitlande, um oxa; ok reyndesk <anchor id=a44.20>svá, at Karle átte. Síðan eggiaðe Care þræl sínn til at drepa<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a44.21>Karla. Þrællenn lét sem hann &oeacute;rr være, ok hlióp suðr um hraun. <anchor id=a45.1><pb id=pb45 n=45><note place=margin>[66: ii. 1.]</note>Karle sat á þreskilde, þrællenn hió hann bana-h&oelig;gg. Síðan drap <anchor id=a45.2>Cáre þrælenn. Þióðolfr, son Karla, drap Cylan Cára son í Cylans-holme. <anchor id=a45.3>Síðan brende Þióðolfr Cara inne, þar sem nú heiter á <anchor id=a45.4>Brenno. Biarne Sturlo son tók skírn ok bió á Biarna-st&aolig;ðom í <anchor id=a45.5>Tungo&apos;nne-Lítlo, ok lét þar g&oelig;ra kirkjo.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<p n=2.1><anchor id=a45.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Þróndr Nefja hét maðr ágætr, faðer Þórsteins, es <anchor id=a45.7>átte Lofth&oeacute;no, dóttor Arenbiarnar hersess or Fi&aolig;rðom. <anchor id=a45.8>Syster Loft-h&oeacute;no vas Arnþrúðr, es átte Þórer herser Hroallz son; <anchor id=a45.9>ok var þeirra son Arinbi&aolig;rn herser. Móðer þeirra Arnþrúðar vas <anchor id=a45.10>Ástríðr Sl&oelig;ki-drengr, dótter Braga skáldz ok Lofth&oeacute;no, dóttor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a45.11>Erps Lútanda. Son Þorsteins ok Lofth&oeacute;no vas Hrosskell, es átte <anchor id=a45.12>Ióreiðe, Olves dóttor, Finna sonar, Mottuls sonar<note place=apparatus id=an45.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sonar]</ab> om. S.</note> konungs; Hall&shy;kell <anchor id=a45.13>hét son þeirra.

<p n=2.1.1><anchor id=a45.14>Hrosskell fór til Íslannz ok kom í Grunna-fi&aolig;rð, ok bió fyrst á <anchor id=a45.15>Akra-nese. Þá &aolig;moðosk þeir Cetill br&oeacute;dr við hann. Síðan nam<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a45.16>hann Hvítár-síðo, miðle Kiarr-ár ok Flióta. Hann bió á Hallkels-st&aolig;ðom<note place=apparatus id=an45.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Hrosskels-st., M.</note>, <anchor id=a45.17>ok Hallkell son hans efter hann; ok átte Þórríðe Dyllo, <anchor id=a45.18>dóttor Gunnlaugs or Þverár-hlíð ok Vélaugar &OElig;rlygs dóttor frá <anchor id=a45.19>Esjoberge.

<p n=2.1.2><anchor id=a45.20><note place=apparatus id=an45.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> This § we have moved two §§ up.</note>B&aolig;rn þeirra Hallkels ok Þórríðar, vóro þau Þórarenn, ok Finn&shy;varðr,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a45.21>Tindr, ok Illoge enn Svarte, ok Gríma es átte Þorgils Ara <anchor id=a46.1><pb id=pb46 n=46><note place=margin>[67: ii. 2.]</note>son: Þóraren vá Músa-Bolverkr<note place=apparatus id=an46.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> S; Bolverk, Cd.</note>, es hann bió í Hrauns-áse. Þá lét <anchor id=a46.2>hann g&oelig;ra þar virke, ok veitte Hvít-&aoacute; í g&oelig;gnom ásenn; en áðr <anchor id=a46.3>fell hon um Melrakka-dal ofan: Illoge ok Tindr sótto <corr sic="B&aolig;lvek" resp=errata>B&aolig;lverk</corr> í <anchor id=a46.4>virket.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a46.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hrosskell gaf land Þórvarðe, f&aolig;ðor Smiðcels, f&aolig;ðor þeirra<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a46.6>Þórarens, ok Auðunnar, es reð fyrer Helles-m&aolig;nnom. Hann bió <anchor id=a46.7>á Þorvarðz-st&aolig;ðom, ok átte Fliótzdal allan upp frá<note place=apparatus id=an46.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>frá]</ab> með, S.</note> Fliótom.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a46.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hrosskell gaf Þórgaute skipverja sínom land niðr í Síðo. <anchor id=a46.9>Hann bió á Þorgautz-st&aolig;ðom: hans syner vóro þeir Gíslar tveir.

<p n=2.4><anchor id=a46.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ásbi&aolig;rn enn Auðge, Harðar son, keypte land fyr sunnan<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a46.11>Kiarr-&aoacute; upp í<note place=apparatus id=an46.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>í]</ab> frá, S. Nit-, H; Hvít-, S.</note> Sleggjo-l&oelig;k til Hnit-biarga. Hann bió á Ásbiarnar-st&aolig;ðom: <anchor id=a46.12>hann átte Þórbi&aolig;rgo, dóttor Miðfiarðar-Skeggja; þeirra <anchor id=a46.13>dótter vas Ingibi&aolig;rg er átte Illoge enn Svarte.

<p n=2.5><anchor id=a46.14><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Ornolfr, es nam Ornolfs-dal ok Kiarra-dal fyr norðan upp <anchor id=a46.15>til Hnitbiarga<note place=apparatus id=an46.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> Nitbiarga, H; Hvít-, S.</note>: Cetill Blundr keyfte land at Ornolfe allt fyr norðan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a46.16>Klif, ok bió í Ornolfs-dale. Ornolfr g&oelig;rðe þá bú upp í Kiarra-dal&mdash;þar <anchor id=a46.17>heita nú Ornolfs-staðer. Fyr ofan Klif heiter Kiarra-dalr; <anchor id=a46.18>þvi at þar vóro hrís-ki&oelig;rr ok smá-skógar miðle Kiarr-ár ok<note place=apparatus id=an46.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok]</ab> om. S.</note> Þver-ár, <anchor id=a46.19>svá at þar mátte eige byggja: Blund-Cetill vas maðr stór-auðigr; <anchor id=a46.20>hann lét ryðja víða í skógom ok byggja þar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p><anchor id=a46.21>[M: Aurnolfr hét maðr es nam Norð-tungo alla á miðle Kiarr-ár <anchor id=a47.1><pb id=pb47 n=47><note place=margin>[68: ii. 2.]</note>ok Þver-ár, ok bió í Ornolfsdal. Hans son vas Blunn-Ketill, faðer <anchor id=a47.2>Þorkels, es H&oeacute;nsa-Þórer brende inne. Þaðan af g&oelig;rðesk deilð <anchor id=a47.3>þeirra Þórðar Gelliss ok Tungo-Oddz.]


<p n=3.1><anchor id=a47.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Hrómundr hét maðr, bróðer Gríms ens Háleyska<note place=apparatus id=an47.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Háleyska]</ab> son Þóres Gunlaugs sonar, Hrolfs sonar, Ketils sonar Kiolfara, Hromundar sonar, add. S (see p. 37).</note>. <anchor id=a47.5>Hann kom skipe síno í Hvít-&aoacute;; hann nam Þverár-dal,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a47.6>ok Þverár-hlíð ofan til Hallar-múla, ok framm til Þver-ár. <anchor id=a47.7>Hann bió á Hrómundar-st&aolig;ðom&mdash;þar es nú kallat at Calls-brecko. <anchor id=a47.8>Hans son vas Gunnlaugr Orms-tunga, es bió á Gunnlaugs-st&aolig;ðom <anchor id=a47.9>fyr sunnan Þver-&aoacute;; hann átte Vélaugo, sem fyrr es ritit<note place=apparatus id=an47.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> ritað, Cd.</note>.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a47.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> H&aolig;gni hét skipvere Hrómundar; hann bió á H&aolig;gna-st&aolig;ðom.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a47.11>Hans son var Helge at Helga-vatne, faðer Arngríms Goða, es vas <anchor id=a47.12>at Blund-Cetils-brenno: H&aolig;gne vas bróðer Finnz ens Auðga.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a47.13><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ísleifr ok Isr&oelig;ðr<note place=apparatus id=an47.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Israuðr, Cd.</note> br&oelig;ðr, n&aoacute;mo l&aolig;nd ofan frá Sleggjo-l&oeacute;k, <anchor id=a47.14>miðle Ornolfs-dals<corr resp=errata> ár</corr> ok Hvít-ár, et &oelig;fra<note place=apparatus id=an47.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&oelig;fra]</ab> Nyrðra, S.</note> ofan til <corr sic="Rauða-l&aolig;kjar" resp=errata>Rauða-l&oeacute;kjar</corr>; en et <anchor id=a47.15>syðra ofan til H&oelig;rða-hóla<note place=apparatus id=an47.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> Horð-hóla, S.</note>: Isleifr bió á Ísleifs-st&aolig;ðom, en Ísr&oelig;ðr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a47.16>á Ísr&oelig;ðar-st&aolig;ðom, ok átte land et syðra með Hvít-&aoacute;. Hann vas <anchor id=a47.17>faðer Þórbiarnar, f&aolig;ðor Liótz á Veggjom, es fell í Heiðar-víge.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a47.18><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ásgeirr hét skipvere Hrómundar, es bió á Hamri upp frá <anchor id=a47.19>Helga-vatne. Hann átte Hilde Stiorn<hi>u</hi>, dóttor Þórvallz Þorgríms <anchor id=a47.20>sonar Brækiss<note place=apparatus id=an47.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Stiorn<hi>u</hi> ... Brækiss]</ab> S; hildi stiorn s. brokiss, H.</note>: þeirra syner vóro þeir Steinbi&aolig;rn enn Sterke, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a48.1><pb id=pb48 n=48><note place=margin>[69, 70: ii. 3.]</note>enn stór-h&oelig;gge<note place=apparatus id=an48.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> -hoggvi, S.</note>; ok Þórvarðr, faðer Mæfo, es Hrifla<note place=apparatus id=an48.2><ab type=textRef>Hrifla]</ab> S; Rifla, Cd.</note> átte; ok <anchor id=a48.2>Þórsteinn enn þriðe; fiórðe Helge, faðer Þórðar, f&aolig;ðor Scald-Helga.

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a48.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Arnbi&aolig;rg hét kona; hon bió at Arnbiargar-l&oeacute;k: hennar <anchor id=a48.5>syner vóro þeir Elldgrímr, es bió á halsin upp frá Arnbiargar-l&oeacute;k,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a48.6>á Elldgríms-st&aolig;ðom; ok Þórgestr, es feck bana-sár þá es þeir <anchor id=a48.7>Hrane b&aolig;rðosk, þar sem nú heiter Hrana-fall.

<p n=3.6><anchor id=a48.8><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórunn bió í Þórunnar-hollte. Hon átte land ofan til Víðe-l&oeacute;kjar, <anchor id=a48.9>ok upp til mótz við Þórríðe Spá-kono systor sína, es bió í <anchor id=a48.10>Gr&aolig;f&mdash;Við hána es kendr Þórunnar-hyr í Þver-&aoacute;. Ok frá henne<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a48.11>ero Hamar-byggjar (komner).

<p n=3.7><anchor id=a48.12><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þorbi&aolig;rn, son Arnbiarnar, Óleifs sonar<note place=apparatus id=an48.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sonar]</ab> Here is blank for a word in S.</note> Langhals. Hann <anchor id=a48.13>vas bróðer Lýtings í Vápna-firðe: Þorbi&aolig;rn nam Stafa-holltz-tungo <anchor id=a48.14>miðle Norðr-ár ok Þver-ár.  Hann bió í Arnar-hollte: <anchor id=a48.15>hans son vas Teitr í Stafa-holte, faðer Einars, ok Þorvallz, f&aolig;ðor<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a48.16>Þórk&aolig;tlo, es átte Hyrningr Cleppiarns son<note place=apparatus id=an48.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <hi>From</hi> ok Þorvallz ... son, add. M&ast;.</note>.

<p n=3.8><anchor id=a48.17><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þorbi&aolig;rn Blese nam land í Norðrár-dale fyr sunnan upp frá <anchor id=a48.18>Króke; ok Hellis-dal allan, ok bió á Blesa-st&aolig;ðom. Hans son <anchor id=a48.19>var Gísli at Melom í Hellis-dale&mdash;Við hann es kennt Gísla-vatn<note place=apparatus id=an48.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> ero kend Gísla-votn, S.</note>. <anchor id=a48.20>Annarr son Blesa vas Þórfinnr á Þórfinnz-st&aolig;ðom, faðer Þórgerðar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a48.21>Heiðar-eckjo, móðor Þórðar Erro, f&aolig;ðor Þorgerðar, móðor Helga<note place=apparatus id=an48.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> S; Helgu, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a48.22>at Lunde.


<pb id=pb49 n=49><note place=margin>[70: ii. 3.]</note>

<p n=3.9><anchor id=a49.1><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Geirmundr, son Gunnbiarnar Gandz, nam Tungona á miðle <anchor id=a49.2>Norðr-ár ok Sand-ár, ok bió í Tungo: hans son vas Brúne, faðer <anchor id=a49.3>Þórbiarnar at Steinom es fell í Heiðar-víge.

<p n=3.10><anchor id=a49.4><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Orn enn Gamle nam Sann-dal<note place=apparatus id=an49.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> I. e. Sanddal.</note> ok Mióva-dal, ok svá <anchor id=a49.5>Norðrár-dal ofan frá Króke til Arnar-b&oeacute;less, ok bió á Háreks-st&aolig;ðom.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=3.11><anchor id=a49.6><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Rauða-Bi&aolig;rn nam Biarnar-dal, ok þá dala es þar ganga af; <anchor id=a49.7>ok átte annat bú niðr frá Mælefellz-gile; en annat niðre í heraðe; <anchor id=a49.8>sem ritið<note place=apparatus id=an49.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> ritað, Cd.</note> es.

<p><anchor id=a49.10>[M&ast;: Biorn hét maðr Norr&oelig;nn, es kom út síð landnáma-tíðar,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a49.11>ok nam Norðrár-dal fyr norðan Norðr-&aoacute;, ok Biarnar-dal allan; <anchor id=a49.12>ok þá dala alla es þar ganga af: hann bió at Dals-minne: hann <anchor id=a49.13>blés fyrstr manna rauða á Íslande; ok vas hann af því kallaðr <anchor id=a49.14>Rauða-Biorn: hann átte, <hi>etc.</hi>]

<p n=3.12><anchor id=a49.15><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Karl nam Karls-dal upp frá Hreðu-vatne<note place=apparatus id=an49.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> S; H&oelig;lga-vatne, H.</note>; ok bió under<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a49.16>Karls-felle; ok átte land ofan til Iamna-skarðz til mótz við <anchor id=a49.17>Grím.

<p><anchor id=a49.18>[<hi>M</hi>&ast; (&lsquo;Landn.&rsquo;):&mdash;


<p n=4.1><anchor id=a49.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Þórolfr hét maðr, er bió í Naumo-dale; hann vas <anchor id=a49.20>Ulfs son, es kallaðr vas Kvelld-Ulfr; Grímr hét<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a49.21>annarr son Ulfs. Haraldr konungr enn <corr sic="Hárfagr" resp=errata>Hárfagre</corr> lét drepa Þórolf, <anchor id=a49.22>ok g&oelig;rði &oelig;ngo b&aeacute;ta; en þess hefnðe Grímr, ok fór síðan til <anchor id=a50.1><pb id=pb50 n=50><note place=margin>[71: ii. 4.]</note>Íslannz; en Ulfr andaðez í hafeno. Skalla-Grímr kom skipe síno <anchor id=a50.2>í Gufu-ár-ós, ok nam land á miðle Norðr-ár ok Hitar-ár, allt á <anchor id=a50.3>miðle fiallz ok fi&aolig;ro, ok bió at Borg. Hann átti Bero Yngvars <anchor id=a50.4>dóttor. Syner þeirra Skalla-Gríms vóro þeir Þórolfr ok Egill; <anchor id=a50.5>þeir &aoacute;tto báðir Ásgerðe Biarnar dóttor; ok vas dótter Þórolfs<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a50.6>Þórdís, es átte Grímr at Mosfelle. Þórolfr fell á Vinheiði í Englande <anchor id=a50.7>í orrosto<note place=apparatus id=an50.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Emend.; Þ. fell á Vindlandi í orr., M&ast;.</note>; en Egill fór til Íslannz, ok bió at Borg, ok hans <anchor id=a50.8>kyns-menn langa tíma.]

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a50.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Gríss ok Grímr héto leysingjar Skalla-Gríms; þeim gaf hann <anchor id=a50.10>land upp við fi&aolig;ll; Gríse Grísar-tungo, en Gríme Gríms-dal.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a50.11><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Balke hét maðr, son Blæings Sóta sonar of Sóta-nese; hann <anchor id=a50.12>barðesk á móte Haralde konunge í Hafrs-firðe. Hann fór til <anchor id=a50.13>Íslannz, ok nam Hrúta-fi&aolig;rð allan, ok bió í B&oeacute;. Hans son vas <anchor id=a50.14>Berse Goðlauss, es nam Langa-vaz-dal ok bió á Torfhvala-st&aolig;ðom. <anchor id=a50.15>Hans syster vas Geirbi&aolig;rg es átte Þorgeirr Meldunn í Tungo-felle;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a50.16>þeirra son Véleifr enn Gamle, faðer Holmg&aolig;ngo-Bersa. <anchor id=a50.17>Bersa Goðlauss átte Þordíse, dóttor Þorhaddz<note place=apparatus id=an50.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Þoraddz, Cd.</note> or Hitár-dale, ok <anchor id=a50.18>fylgðo henne heiman Holms-l&aolig;nd, ok bió hann þar síðan. Þeirra <anchor id=a50.19>son Arngeirr, es átte Þórríðe dóttor Þórfinnz ens Stranga; þeirra <anchor id=a51.1><pb id=pb51 n=51><note place=margin>[72: ii. 4.]</note>son Bi&aolig;rn Hitd&oeacute;la-kappe. Móðer Þórríðar vas Sæuðr, dótter <anchor id=a51.2>Skalla-Gríms.

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a51.3><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Sigmundr hét leysinge Skalla-Gríms; hónom gaf hann land <anchor id=a51.4>miðle Gliúfr-ár ok Norðr-ár. Hann bió á Haugom, áðr hann <anchor id=a51.5>f&oeacute;rðe sik í Munoðar-nes&mdash;Við hann es kennt Sigmundar-nes.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=4.5><anchor id=a51.6><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Rauða-Bi&aolig;rn keypte land at Skalla-Gríme miðle Gliúfr-ár<corr resp=errata> ok Guf-ár</corr>. <anchor id=a51.7>Hann bió at Rauða-Biarnar-st&aolig;ðom upp frá Eski-holte.  Hans <anchor id=a51.8>son vas Þorkell Trefill í Skarðe, ok Helge í Hvamme í Norðrár-dale&mdash;ok <anchor id=a51.9>es þar heygðr&mdash;ok Gunnvaldr, faðer Þorkels, es átte <anchor id=a51.10>Helgo, dóttor Þorgeirs af Víðe-mýre.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=4.6><anchor id=a51.11><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórbirne Crum ok Þóre<note place=apparatus id=an51.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> S as well as Eg. Saga calls Thore Thurs and Thord Beigalde.</note> Beigalda br&oeacute;ðrom gaf Skalla-Grímr <anchor id=a51.12>land fyr útan Guf<hi>u</hi>-&aoacute;. Bió Þórbi&aolig;rn <corr resp=errata>í </corr>Crums-hólom<note place=apparatus id=an51.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> Eg. Saga; Holom, Cd.</note> en Þórer á <anchor id=a51.13>Beigalda.

<p n=4.7><anchor id=a51.14><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þórðe Þurs, ok Þorgeire Iarðlang, ok Þórbi&aolig;rgo Stong systor <anchor id=a51.15>þeirra, gaf Skalla-Grímr land upp frá Einkunnom ok it ýtra með<note place=apparatus id=an51.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>upp frá ... með]</ab> Eg. Saga; fyr sunnan Langá, H; upp með L., S.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a51.16>Lang-&aoacute;.  Bió Þórðr á Þurs-st&aolig;ðom, en Þorgeirr á Iarðlangs-st&aolig;ðom, <anchor id=a51.17>en Þórbi&aolig;rg í Stangar-hollte.

<p n=4.8><anchor id=a51.18><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Áne hét maðr, es Grímr gaf land miðle Lang-ár ok Haf<hi>r</hi>s-l&oelig;kjar<note place=apparatus id=an51.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> ofan með Langá, milli ok Hafrs-l&oelig;kjar, S; Háfs-, Eg. Saga.</note>; <anchor id=a51.19>hann bió at Ána-brecko. Hans son vas Onundr Sióne, <anchor id=a51.20>faðer Steinars ok Dollo, móðor Cormacs.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=4.9><anchor id=a51.21><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Grímolfr bygðe fyrst á Grímolfs-st&aolig;ðom. Við hann es kennd <anchor id=a52.1><pb id=pb52 n=52><note place=margin>[73: ii. 4.]</note>Gríms-fit ok Grímolfs-l&oeacute;kr. Grímr hét son hans, es bió fyr <anchor id=a52.2>sunnan fi&aolig;rð; hans son vas Grímarr, es bió á Grímars-st&aolig;ðom. Við <anchor id=a52.3>hann deilðo þeir Þorsteinn ok Tungo-Oddr.

<p n=4.10><anchor id=a52.4><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Grane bió á Grana-st&aolig;ðom í Digra-nese<note place=apparatus id=an52.1>§§ 9, 10 are taken from Egils Saga.</note>.

<p n=4.11><anchor id=a52.5><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Þorfinnr enn Strange hét merkis-maðr Þórolfs Skalla-Gríms<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a52.6>sonar. Hónom gaf Skalla-Grímr Sæunne dóttor sína, ok land fyr <anchor id=a52.7>útan Lang-&aoacute; til<note place=apparatus id=an52.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> út til, S.</note> Leiro-l&oeacute;kjar, ok upp til fiallz, ok til Alft-ár; hann <anchor id=a52.8>bió á Forse. Þeirra dótter vas Þórdís, móðer Biarnar Hitd&oeacute;la-kappa.

<p n=4.12><anchor id=a52.10><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Yngvarr hét maðr, faðer Bero es Skalla-Grímr átte. Hónom<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a52.11>gaf Grímr land miðle Leiro-l&oeacute;kjar ok Straum-fiarðar; hann bió <anchor id=a52.12>á Alfta-nese. Onnor dótter hans vas Þórdís es átte Þorgeirr <anchor id=a52.13>Lambe á Lamba-st&aolig;ðom, faðer Þórðar, es þrælar Cetils Gufo <anchor id=a52.14>brendo inne. Son Þórðar vas Lambe enn Sterke<note place=apparatus id=an52.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Son ... Sterke]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=4.13><anchor id=a52.15><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Steinolfr hét maðr, es nam Hraun-dal hvárn-tveggja, allt<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a52.16>miðle Alft-ár ok Hit-ár<note place=apparatus id=an52.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hit-ár]</ab> thus Cd. at leyfi Sk.-Gr.] add. S.</note> ok upp til Griót-ár, at leyfi Skalla-Gríms; <anchor id=a52.17>ok bió í enom syðra Hraun-dale. Hans son vas Þorleifr es Hraun-d&oeacute;ler <anchor id=a52.18>ero frá komner. Þórunn hét dótter Steinolfs, es átte Þorbi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a52.19>Vífils son, faðer Þórgerðar, móðor Ásmundar, f&aolig;ðor Svein-biarnar, <anchor id=a52.20>f&aolig;ðor Oddz, f&aolig;ðor Gró, móðor Oddz á Alfta-nese.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>


<pb id=pb53 n=53><note place=margin>[74: ii. 4.]</note>

<p n=4.14><anchor id=a53.1><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an53.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> &#x16C9;<!-- Algiz rune; z-rune -->, Cd.</note>Þórhaddr hét maðr ágætr, son Steins Miok-siglanda, Vig&shy;biods-sonar, <anchor id=a53.2>Boðmóðs sonar or Bulka-rúme. Hann nam Hitár-dal <anchor id=a53.3>allan ofan til Griót-ár fyr sunnan; ok fyr norðan allt miðle Hit-ár <anchor id=a53.4>ok Kalld-ár til sióvar. Hans son vas Þórgeirr, faðer Hafþórs, <anchor id=a53.5>f&aolig;ðor Goðnýjar, móðor Þorláks ens Auðga: Þorgeirs syner vóro<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a53.6>þeir Grímr í Skarðe, ok Þórarenn, Finnboge, Eysteinn, Gestr, <anchor id=a53.7>Torbe<note place=apparatus id=an53.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þorgeirs syner ... Torbe]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=4.15><anchor id=a53.8><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Þórgils Cnappe, leysinge Colla Hroallz sonar, nam Cnappa-dal. <anchor id=a53.9>Hans synir vóro þeir Ingialdr, Þórarenn, ok Þórer<note place=apparatus id=an53.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> S, S&ast; (Grett. S.), om. Þorer.</note> es bió at <anchor id=a53.10>Okrom, ok eignaðesk allt land miðle Hit-ár ok Alft-ár, ok upp til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a53.11>mótz við Steinolf. Son Þóriss<note place=apparatus id=an53.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Þorarens, S, S&ast;.</note> (vas) Þróndr, es átte Steinunne <anchor id=a53.12>dóttor Hrútz af Kambs-nese: þeirra syner Þórer ok<note place=apparatus id=an53.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok]</ab> here is a blank in S.</note> Skúmr, faðer <anchor id=a53.13>Torfa, f&aolig;ðor Tanna; hans son vas Hrútr es átte Kolfinno dóttor <anchor id=a53.14>Illoga ens Svarta.

<p n=4.15.1><anchor id=a53.15>Nú ero þeir menn talðer es bygt hafa<note place=apparatus id=an53.6><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bygt hafa]</ab> land hafa numit, S.</note> í land-náme Skalla-Gríms.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>


<p n=5.1><anchor id=a53.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an53.7><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Here comes a single vell. leaf.</note>Grímr hét maðr, Ingiallz son, Hroallz sonar or Hadd&shy;ingja-dale, <anchor id=a53.17>bróðer Ása hersiss. Hann fór til Íslannz <anchor id=a53.18>í landa-leit, ok siglðe fyr norðan land. Hann vas um vettrenn í <anchor id=a53.19>Grímsey á Steingríms-firðe. Bergdís hét kona hans; en Þórer <anchor id=a53.20>son.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>


<pb id=pb54 n=54><note place=margin>[76: ii. 5.]</note>

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a54.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Grímr r&oelig;re til fiska um vettrenn<note place=apparatus id=an54.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> um haustit, S.</note> með þrælom sínom; ok son <anchor id=a54.2>hans vas með hónom. Ok es sveinenn tók at kala, þá f&oeacute;rðo <anchor id=a54.3>þeir hann í sel-belg, ok drógo at halsenom. Grímr dró marmennil<note place=apparatus id=an54.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>s&oelig;l-, vell, marmennil]</ab> S; margmelli, vell.</note>. <anchor id=a54.4>Grímr mælte [es hann kom upp]: &lsquo;Segðú oss ævi óra ok lang-líve, <anchor id=a54.5>ella k&oelig;mr þú eigi heim.&rsquo; [Hann svarar:] &lsquo;Engo varðar yðr at<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a54.6>vita aðra an sveinenn í sel-belgenom;<note place=apparatus id=an54.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> b&oelig;lg-, vell.</note> þvi at þú munt dauðr áðr <anchor id=a54.7>vár kome; en son þínn skal þar byggja ok land nema, sem Skalm, <anchor id=a54.8>merr þín, legsk under klyfjom.&rsquo; Ecke fengo þeir fleire orð af <anchor id=a54.9>hónom<note place=apparatus id=an54.4><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ecke ... hónom]</ab> add. S.</note>. En síðar um vettrenn andaðesk Grímr, ok es þar heygðr. <anchor id=a54.10>[S: En síðar um vetrenn reru þeir Grímr svá at sveinnenn var á<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a54.11>lande, þá tyndoz þeir aller.]

<p n=5.2.1><anchor id=a54.12>Þau Bergdís ok Þórer fóro um váret or Grímsey, ok vestr yfer <anchor id=a54.13>heiðe til Breiða-fiarðar. Skalm geck fyrer allt sumaret ok <anchor id=a54.14>lagðesk aldrege. Annan vettr vóro þau á Skalmar-nese í Breiða-firðe. <anchor id=a54.15>En of sumaret efter sn&oelig;ro þau suðr. Þá geck Skalm fyrer,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a54.16>þar til es þau kómo af heiðom suðr til Borgar-fiarðar, þar sem <anchor id=a54.17>sand-melar tveir rauðer vóro<note place=apparatus id=an54.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vóro]</ab> stóðu fyrir, S.</note>. Þar lagðesk Skalm niðr under <anchor id=a54.18>klyfjom under enom ýtra melnom: þar nam Þórer land fyr sunnan <anchor id=a54.19>Gnúp-&aoacute; til Kalld-ár, fyr neðan Knappa-dal<note place=apparatus id=an54.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Knappa-dal]</ab> ok Laxár, add. H; Þorer nam land fyr n. Kn., á mille Kaldár, ok Lax-ár, mille fiallz ok f., M&ast;.</note>, allt miðle fiallz ok <anchor id=a54.20>fi&aolig;ro. Hann bió at ýtra Rauða-mel.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=5.3><anchor id=a54.21><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þá vas Þórer gamall ok blindr, es hann kom út síð um kveld, <anchor id=a54.22>ok sá, at maðr r&oelig;re útan í Kaldár-ós<note place=apparatus id=an54.7><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> Kaldarár-ós, vell.</note> á iarn-n&oelig;kkva, mikill ok <anchor id=a55.1><pb id=pb55 n=55><note place=margin>[78, 79: ii. 6.]</note>illilegr; ok geck þar á land upp til b&oeacute;jar þess, es í Hripe heiter, <anchor id=a55.2>ok gróf þar í st&aolig;ðols-hliðe. En um nóttena kom þar upp iarð-eldr, <anchor id=a55.3>ok brann<note place=apparatus id=an55.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> S; ok brann hraun, H.</note> þá Borgar-hraun&mdash;þar vas b&oelig;renn sem nú es <anchor id=a55.4>borgen.

<p n=5.4><anchor id=a55.5><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Son Sel-Þóres vas Þórfinnr, es átte Iófríðe dóttor Tungo-Oddz.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a55.6>Þeirra syner vóro þeir Þórkell ok Þórgils, Steinn ok Galte, <anchor id=a55.7>Ormr, ok Þórormr, ok Þórer<note place=apparatus id=an55.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þeirra syner ... Þórer]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=5.4.1><anchor id=a55.8>Dótter Þorfinnz vas Þórríðr, es átte Þórbrandr í Alfta-firðe.

<p n=5.4.2><anchor id=a55.9>Þeir Sel-Þórer frændr ener heiðno dó í Þóres-bi&aolig;rg<note place=apparatus id=an55.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Þor&shy;biorg, S.</note>.

<p n=5.4.3><anchor id=a55.10>Þórgils ok Þórkell, syner Þórfinnz &aoacute;tto báðer Unne dóttor Alfs í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a55.11>D&aolig;lom&mdash;Skalm dó í Skalmar-keldo.

<p n=5.5><anchor id=a55.12><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Colbeinn Clak-h&aolig;fðe, Atla son or Atleyjo af Fi&aolig;lom, fór til <anchor id=a55.13>Íslannz ok keypte l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll miðle Kald-ár ok Hitar-ár<note place=apparatus id=an55.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hitar-ár]</ab> thus, vell.</note> fyr neðan <anchor id=a55.14>Sand-brecko, ok bió á Kolbeins-st&aolig;ðom. Hans son vas Finnboge <anchor id=a55.15>í Fagra-skóge ok Þórðr Skálld.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=5.6><anchor id=a55.16><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórmóðr Goðe ok Þórðr Gnúpa, syner Oddz ens Racka, <anchor id=a55.17>Þórviðar sunar, Freyviðar sonar, Alfs sonar af Vors: þeir br&oeacute;ðr <anchor id=a55.18>fóro til Íslannz, ok n&aoacute;mo land miðle Lax-ár ok Straumfiarðar-ár; <anchor id=a55.19>hafðe Þórðr Gnúpo-dal, ok bió þar; en síðan Skofte son hans. <anchor id=a55.20>Hann<note place=apparatus id=an55.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Hann, above the line.</note> (vas) faðer Hi&aolig;rleifs Goða, ok Finno es átte Refr enn mikle:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a55.21>þeirra son Dalcr, faðer Steinunnar, móðor Skald-Refs.

<pb id=pb56 n=56><note place=margin>[79: ii. 6.]</note>

<p n=5.7><anchor id=a56.1><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þórmóðr bió á Rauðkollz-st&aolig;ðom;&mdash;hann vas kallaðr Þórmóðr <anchor id=a56.2>Goðe<note place=apparatus id=an56.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann ... Goðe]</ab> add. S.</note>,&mdash;ok átte Gerðe, dóttor Ceallacs ens Gamla. Þeirra <anchor id=a56.3>son vas Goðlaugr enn Auðge; hann átto Þórdíse, dóttor Svart-h&aolig;fða, <anchor id=a56.4>Biarnar sonar Gollbera, ok Þórríðar Tungo-Oddz dóttor<note place=apparatus id=an56.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>S; ok d. Þóriðar, vell. (badly). Oddz]</ab> Oz, vell.</note>, <anchor id=a56.5>es þá bió í H&aolig;rgs-holte. Goðlaugr enn Auðge sá at Rauðamels-l&aolig;nd<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a56.6>vóro betre an &aolig;nnor l&aolig;nd þar í sveit; hann skoraðe á Þórfinn <anchor id=a56.7>til landa, ok bauð hónom holm-g&aolig;ngo. Þeir urðo báðer <anchor id=a56.8>óvíger á holme; en Þórríðr Tungo-Oddz dotter gr&oeacute;dde þá ok <anchor id=a56.9>sætte.

<p n=5.8><anchor id=a56.10><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Goðlaugr nam síðan land frá Straumfiarðar-&aoacute; til Furo miðle<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a56.11>fiallz ok fi&aolig;ro, ok bió í Borgar-holte&mdash;Frá hónom ero Straum&shy;firðingar <anchor id=a56.12>komner. Hans son vas Goðleifr, es átte annan kn&aolig;rr, en <anchor id=a56.13>annan Þórolfr son Loftz ens Gamla af Eyrar-backa, þá es þeir <anchor id=a56.14>b&aolig;rðozk við Gyrð iarl Sigvalda son í Meðalfars-sunde, ok héldo <anchor id=a56.15>fé síno.&mdash;Þar um orte Goðleifr Gyrz-vísor.&mdash;Annarr son Goðlaugs<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a56.16>vas Þorfiðr, faðer Goðlaugs, f&aolig;ðor Þórdísar, móðor Þórðar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Sturlo <anchor id=a56.17>ens Gamla í Hvamme<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=5.9><anchor id=a56.18><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Vale enn Sterke hét hirðmaðr Harallz konungs ens Hárfagra. <anchor id=a56.19>Hann vá víg í véom, ok varð út-lagr. Hann fór til Suðreyja; en <anchor id=a56.20>syner hans fóro þrír til Íslannz;&mdash;Hlíf Hesta-gellder vas móðer<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a56.21>þeirra;&mdash;einn hét Atle; annarr Alfvarenn; þriðe Auðunn Stoðe<note place=apparatus id=an56.3><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Stote, S.</note>. <anchor id=a57.1><pb id=pb57 n=57><note place=margin>[81: ii. 6.]</note>Atle Vala son ok Ásmundr son (hans) n&aoacute;mo land frá Furo til <anchor id=a57.2>Lýso. Ásmundr bió í Langa-holte at Þóro-toftom; hann átte <anchor id=a57.3>Langaholltz-Þóro: en þá es Ásmundr eldezk, skilðesk hann við <anchor id=a57.4>Þóro fyrer mann-kvæmð, ok fór í Öxl at bua til dauða-dags.

<p n=5.10><anchor id=a57.5><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Ásmundr vas heygðr þar ok í skip lagiðr, ok þræll hans<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a57.6>með hónom sá es ser banaðe sialfr, ok vilðe eige lifa efter Ásmund. <anchor id=a57.7>Hann vas lagðr í annan stafn skipsens. Lítlo síðarr dreymðe <anchor id=a57.8>Þóro, at Ásmundr sagðe ser mein at þræl<hi>i</hi>num.&mdash;Þar heiter Ás&shy;mundar-leiðe <anchor id=a57.9>es hann es heygðr&mdash;Vísa þesse vas heyrð í haug hans:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a57.10>Einn byggi ek stoð steina ...<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a57.11>Efter þat vas leitað til haugsens ok vas þrællenn rekenn or <anchor id=a57.12>skipeno.

<p><anchor id=a57.13>Þóra lét g&oelig;ra skála of þióð-braut þvera, ok lét þar iamnan <anchor id=a57.14>standa borð; en hon sat úte á stóle, ok bauð hverjom<note place=apparatus id=an57.1><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok bauð hverjom]</ab> ok laðaðe þar geste hvern es m. v. eta, S.</note> es mat <anchor id=a57.15>vilde eta.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a57.16>Atle vas son Ásmundar, faðer Surtz, f&aolig;ðor Goðleifs, f&aolig;ðor Goð&shy;brannz, <anchor id=a57.17>f&aolig;ðor Surz Smiðs, f&aolig;ðor Eyjolfs prestz munks.

<p n=5.11><anchor id=a57.18><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Hrolfr enn Digre, son Eyvindar Eiki-krox, bróðer Illoga <anchor id=a57.19>Fellz-goða austan af Síðo, nam land frá Lýso til Hraun-hafnar. <anchor id=a57.20>Hans son vas Helge í Hofg&aolig;rðom, faðer Finnboga, ok Biarnar,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a57.21>ok Hrólfs, Bi&aolig;rn vas faðer Gestz, f&aolig;ðor Skald Refs.

<pb id=pb58 n=58><note place=margin>[83: ii. 7.]</note><p n=5.12><anchor id=a58.1><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Solve hét maðr, es land nam miðle Hellis-hrauns ok Sleggjo-beins-ár. <anchor id=a58.2>Hann bió í Brenninge fyrst; en síðan á Solva-hamre; <anchor id=a58.3>þvi at hann þóttesk þar vesa fleire manna gagn.


<p n=6.1><anchor id=a58.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> Sigmundr son Ketils Þistils, þess es numit hafðe <anchor id=a58.5>Þistils-fi&aolig;rð, hann átte Hildigunne. Hann nam land<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a58.6>miðle Hellis-hrauns ok Berovíkr-hrauns. Hann bió at Laugar-brecko, <anchor id=a58.7>ok es þar heygðr. Hann átte þriá sono; einn vas Einarr, <anchor id=a58.8>es þar bió síðan at Laugar-brecko. Þeir feðgar selðo Lóns-land <anchor id=a58.9>Einare, es síðan bió þar.&mdash;Hann vas kallaðr Lón-Einarr.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a58.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hval rak á fi&aolig;ro hans, ok skar hann af nackvat; hann sleit<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a58.11>veðr út, ok rak á land Einars Sigmundar sonar. Lón-Einarr talðe <anchor id=a58.12>fi&aolig;lkynge Hildegunnar því valda. En þá es hvalenn hafðe út rekit <anchor id=a58.13>frá Lón-Einare, fór hann at leita, ok kom svá at, at Einarr Sigmundar <anchor id=a58.14>son skar hvalenn með húskarla sína. Hann hió þegar <anchor id=a58.15>einn þeirra bana-h&oelig;gg. Laugarbrecko-Einarr bað nafna sínn frá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a58.16>fara, &lsquo;Þvi at yðr mun eige duga at að s&oeacute;kja.&rsquo; Lón-Einarr hvarf <anchor id=a58.17>þá frá, þvi at hann vas lið-vana. Einarr Sigmundar son flutte <anchor id=a58.18>heim hvalenn. Ok einn tíma es hann vas eige heima, fór Lón-Einarr <anchor id=a58.19>til Laugar-brecko með vii<hi rend=sup>da</hi> mann<note place=apparatus id=an58.1><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> með vii. mann, above the line.</note> ok stefnde Hildigunne <anchor id=a58.20>um fi&aolig;lkynge. Hon vas dótter Beiniss, Mós sonar, Naddoðs sonar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a58.21>or Færeyjom&mdash;Einarr kom heim þá es Lón-Einarr vas ný-farenn á <anchor id=a59.1><pb id=pb59 n=59><note place=margin>[84: ii. 7.]</note>braut. Hildigunnr sagðe hónom þesse tíðende, ok f&oeacute;rðe hónom <anchor id=a59.2>kyrtil ný-g&oelig;rvan. Einarr tók ski&aolig;ld sínn, ok sverð, ok verk-hest, <anchor id=a59.3>ok reið efter þeim, ok sprengðe hann á Þúfo-bi&aolig;rgom. Þá rann <anchor id=a59.4>Einarr sem hann mátte. En þá es hann kom hiá Dr&aolig;ngom, sá <anchor id=a59.5>hann troll-karl sitja þar á uppe, ok láta roa f&oeacute;tr, svá at þeir tóko<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a59.6>brimet, ok skellde þeim saman svá at sió-drif varð af, ok quað <anchor id=a59.7>víso.

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a59.8>Vas ek þar es fell af fialle ...
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a59.9>Einar gaf &oelig;ngan gaum at þesso. Þeir fundosk þar sem heita <anchor id=a59.10>Manna-fallz-breckor, ok b&aolig;rðosk þar. En kyrtil Einars bito eige<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a59.11>iárn. Fiórer menn fello af Lón-Einare, en tveir flýðo frá hónom<note place=apparatus id=an59.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> en þrælar hans ii. runno frá hónom, S.</note>. Þeir <anchor id=a59.12>nafnar sóttosk lengi áðr sundr geck<note place=apparatus id=an59.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>geck]</ab> here ends the vell. leaf.</note> brók-linde Lón-Einars. En <anchor id=a59.13>es hann tók þar til, hió nafne hans hann bana-h&oelig;gg; en Hreiðarr, <anchor id=a59.14>þræll Einars Sigmundar sonar, sá hann fara skyndilega ok hlióp <anchor id=a59.15>efter hónom; þá sá hann þræla Lón-Einars flýja; rann hann þá efter<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a59.16>þeim, ok drap þá báða í Þræla-vík. Fyrer þat gaf Einarr hónom <anchor id=a59.17>frelse, ok land svá<note place=apparatus id=an59.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> svá vítt, S.</note> mikit sem hann fenge gert um of þriá daga&mdash;þat <anchor id=a59.18>heiter nú Hreiðars-gerðe es hann bió.

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a59.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Einarr bió síðan at Laugar-brecko, ok es heygðr skamt frá <anchor id=a59.20>Sigmundar-hauge; ok es haugr hans iamnan gr&oeacute;nn bæðe vettr ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a59.21>sumar.

<p n=6.4><anchor id=a59.22><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an59.4><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> § 4 is taken from S.</note>Einarr at Laugar-brecko átte Unne, dóttor Þóres, bróðor <anchor id=a59.23>Ásláks í Langa-dal: Hallveig vas dótter þeirra es Þorbi&aolig;rn Vífils <anchor id=a60.1><pb id=pb60 n=60><note place=margin>[86: ii. 8.]</note>son átte. Breiðr hét annarr son Sigmundar, bróðer Einars<note place=apparatus id=an60.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Einars]</ab> blank in S.</note>; hann <anchor id=a60.2>átte Gunnhilde, dóttor Ásláks or Langadale; þeirra son vas Þórmóðr <anchor id=a60.3>es átte Helgo Onundar dóttor, systor Skáld-Hrafns; þeirra <anchor id=a60.4>dótter Herþrúðr, es Simon átte; þeirra dótter Gunnhildr, es Þorgils <anchor id=a60.5>átte; þeirra dótter Valgerðr, móðer Finnboga ens Ramma, Geirs<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a60.6>sonar. Þorkell hét enn þriðe son Sigmundar; hann átte Ióreiðe <anchor id=a60.7>dóttor Tinnz<note place=apparatus id=an60.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Tinnz]</ab> add. M&ast;; blank in S.</note> Hallkels sonar [<hi lang=en-UK>here is a blank left for 12 letters</hi>].

<p n=6.5><anchor id=a60.8><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þorkell hét son Lón-Einars; hann átte Grímo Hallkels <anchor id=a60.9>dóttor, fyrr an Þórgils Ara son.  Finnvarðr vas son þeirra<note place=apparatus id=an60.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Finn-varðr ... þeirra]</ab> add. S.</note>. <anchor id=a60.10>Dótter Laugarbrecko-Einars vas Arnóra, es átte Þorgeirr Vívils<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a60.11>son; þeirra dótter vas Yngvilldr, es átte Þorsteinn son Snorra <anchor id=a60.12>Goða; þeirra dótter Inguðr, es átte Ásbi&aolig;rn Arnorsson.


<p n=7.1><anchor id=a60.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Grímkell hét maðr, son Ulfs Kráko, Hreiðars sonar, <anchor id=a60.14>bróðer Gunnbiarnar, es Gunnbiarnar-sker ero við <anchor id=a60.15>kend: hann nam land frá Berovíkr-hraune til Nes-hrauns, ok út<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a60.16>um Ondort-nes, ok bió at Saxa-hvále. Hann rak braut þaðan <anchor id=a60.17>Saxa Alfarensson, Vala sonar, es bió síðan í Hraune hiá Saxa-hvále. <anchor id=a60.18>Grímkell átte Þórgerðe, dóttor Valþiófs ens Gamla; þeirra <anchor id=a60.19>son vas Þórarenn Corne. Hann vas ham-ramr miok, ok liggr í <anchor id=a60.20>Corna-hauge&mdash;Þat kvað maðr es broteð hafðe haugenn:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb61 n=61><note place=margin>[87: ii. 8.]</note>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a61.1>Hlióp ek í haugenn <hi>forna hvilt hefek lengr of morna</hi>:
    <l><anchor id=a61.2>let ek á braut of <hi>borna</hi> belti ok hringinn Korna<note place=apparatus id=an61.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þat kvað ... hringinn Korna]</ab> add. M&ast;.</note>.
</lg>

<p n=7.1.1><anchor id=a61.3>Þórarenn Corne átte Iórunne, dóttor Einars í Stafaholte; þeirra <anchor id=a61.4>dótter Iarn-gerðr, es átte Ulfr Ugga son.

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a61.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Kl&oelig;ingr hét annarr son Grímkels; hann átte Oddfríðe dóttor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a61.6>Helga af Hvann-eyre. Þeirra son Colle [es átte Þórríðe dóttor <anchor id=a61.7>Ásbrannz frá Kambe; þeirra son vas Skegge, faðer Þórkotlo, es <anchor id=a61.8>átte Illoge, son Þorvallz, Tinnz sonar, faðer Gils es vá Giafvald. <anchor id=a61.9>Bárðr hét annarr son Colla; hann átte Valgerðe Viðars dóttor; <anchor id=a61.10>Vígdís vas dótter þeirra, es átte Þorbi&aolig;rn enn Digre; þeirra dótter<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a61.11>Þórdís, es átte Þórbrandr at Olfus-vatne; Þórer vas son þeirra, ok <anchor id=a61.12>Biarne á Breiða-bólstað, ok Torbe <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>en d. Valgerðr es átte Runolfr <anchor id=a61.13><sic>bps</sic> son<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>: Ásdís hét &aolig;nnor dótter Bárðar; hána átte fyrr Þór&shy;bi&aolig;rn, <anchor id=a61.14>Þorvallz son, bróðer Mána-Liótz sam-m&oeacute;ðre. B&aolig;rn þeirra, <anchor id=a61.15>Þórríðr es átte Þorgrímr Oddz son. B&aolig;rn þeirra, Geirmundr í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a61.16>Máva-hlíð, ok xiiii &aolig;nnor. Ásdíse átte síðarr Skúle Iorundar son. <anchor id=a61.17>Valgerðr frá Mosfelle vas dótter þeirra]<note place=apparatus id=an61.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es átte Þórríðe dóttor ... Mosf. vas dótter þeirra]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=7.3><anchor id=a61.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Alfarenn Vala son hafðe fyrst numet nesit allt miðle Bero-víkr-hrauns <anchor id=a61.19>ok Enniss; hans syner vóro þeir H&aolig;sculldr es bió at <anchor id=a61.20>H&aolig;scollz-&aoacute;m, ok Ingialldr es bió at Ingiallz-hvále; en Gote at<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a61.21>Gota-l&oeacute;k; en Holmkell at Forse við Holmkels-&aoacute;.

<pb id=pb62 n=62><note place=margin>[88: ii. 9.]</note>

<p n=7.4><anchor id=a62.1><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Óláfr Belgr hét maðr es nam land fyr innan Enne til Fróð-ár, <anchor id=a62.2>ók bió í Óláfs-vík.

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a62.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Ormr enn Mióve hét maðr, es kom skipe síno í Fróðár-ós, <anchor id=a62.4>ok bió á Brimils-v&aolig;llom nockora vettr. Hann rak braut Óláf Belg, <anchor id=a62.5>ok nam Víkena gomlo alla miðle Enniss ok Búlanz-h&aolig;fða, ok bió<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a62.6>síðan at Fróð-&aoacute;. Hans son vas Þórbiorn enn Digre, es barðesk við <anchor id=a62.7>Þóraren Svarta, ok fell sialfr ok iii menn með hónom. Um þat <anchor id=a62.8>orte Þórarenn Máfhlíðinga-vísor; efter því sem seger í Eyrbyggja <anchor id=a62.9>sogo; þesse es ein:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a62.10>Qveðen man ...<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a62.11>Af þeim orðom b&aolig;rðosk þeir annat sinn.

<p n=7.5.1><anchor id=a62.12>Þórbi&aolig;rn átte Þórríðe Barkar dóttor ens Digra, Þórsteins sonar <anchor id=a62.13>Þorska-bítz. Þeirra son vas Ketell Kappe, ok vas hann þá útan <anchor id=a62.14>lannz; hann vas faðer Hróðnýjar, es átte Þórsteinn son Víga-Styrs.

<p n=7.5.2><anchor id=a62.15>[S: Hans son vas Þorbiorn enn Digre; hann átte fyrr Þórríðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a62.16>dóttor Ásbrannz frá Kambe, ok vóro þeirra b&aolig;rn, Ketill Kappe, <anchor id=a62.17>Hallsteinn ok Gunnlaugr<note place=apparatus id=an62.1><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Guðlaugr, S (but Gunnl. below).</note>, ok Þorgerðr es átte Onundr Sióne. Þorbiorn <anchor id=a62.18>átte síðan Þórríðe, dóttor Barkar ens Digra ok Þordísar <anchor id=a62.19>Súrs dóttor.]

<p n=7.6><anchor id=a62.20><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an62.2><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> This § is taken from S.</note>[Þorbiorn enn Digre stefnde Geirríðe B&oelig;gifótz dóttor um<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a62.21>fiolkynge; efter þat es Gunnlaugr son hans dó af meine því, es <anchor id=a63.1><pb id=pb63 n=63><note place=margin>[89: ii. 9.]</note>hann tók þá es hann fór at nema fróðleik at Geirríðe&mdash;Hon vas <anchor id=a63.2>móðer Þórarens í Máva-hlíð.&mdash;Um þá s&aolig;k vas Arnkell Goðe <anchor id=a63.3>kvaddr tolftar-kviðar<note place=apparatus id=an63.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tolftar-kviðar]</ab> tolftar-kuaud, S.</note>; ok bar hann af, þvi at Þórarenn vann eið at <anchor id=a63.4>stalla-hring, ok hratt svá máleno. En efter þat hurbo Þórbirne <anchor id=a63.5>stóð-hross á fialle. Þat kende hann Þórarne, ok fór í Máva-hlíð<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a63.6>ok sette dura-dóm. Þeir vóro tolf; en þeir Þórarenn vóro siau <anchor id=a63.7>fyrer, Alfgeirr Suðreyingr, ok Nagle, ok Bi&aolig;rn Austmaðr, ok hús&shy;karlar <anchor id=a63.8>þrír. Þeir hleypðo upp dómenom, ok b&aolig;rðosk þar í túneno. <anchor id=a63.9>Auðr, kona Þórarens, hét á konor at skilja þá. Einn maðr fell af <anchor id=a63.10>Þórarne en tveir af Þórbirne. Þeir Þórbiorn fóro á braut, ok bundo<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a63.11>s&aoacute;r sín hiá stack-garðe upp með V&aoacute;gom. H&aolig;nd Auðar fanzk í <anchor id=a63.12>túne. Því fór Þórarenn efter þeim, ok fann þá hiá garðenom. <anchor id=a63.13>Nagle hlióp grátande um þá, ok í fiall upp. Þar vá Þórarenn Þórbiorn, <anchor id=a63.14>ok særðe Hallstein til ólífiss. Fimm menn fello þar af <anchor id=a63.15>Þórbirne. Þeir Arnkell ok Vermundr veitto Þórarne, ok hofðo seto<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a63.16>at Arnkels. Snorre Goðe mælte efter Þórbiorn, ok sekðe þá alla, <anchor id=a63.17>es at vígeno h&aolig;fðo veret, á Þórsness-þinge. Efter þat brende hann <anchor id=a63.18>skip þeirra Algeirs í Salteyrar-óse. Arnkell keypte þeim skip í <anchor id=a63.19>D&aolig;gorðar-nese ok fylgðe þeim út um eyjar&mdash;Af þesso g&oelig;rðesk <anchor id=a63.20>fiándskapr þeirra Arnkells ok Snorra Goða. Ketill kappe vas þá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a63.21>útan: hann vas faðer Hróðnýjar es átte Þorsteinn son Víga-styrs.]

<pb id=pb64 n=64><note place=margin>[91: ii. 9.]</note>

<p n=7.7><anchor id=a64.1><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Sigurðr Svín-h&aolig;fðe vas kappe mikill; hann bió á Kvern-vága-str&aolig;nd<note place=apparatus id=an64.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Kvern-]</ab> S; kven-, Cd.</note>:

<p n=7.7.1><anchor id=a64.2>Heriolfr son hans vas þá átta vettra<note place=apparatus id=an64.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> hann vá biorninn í einvige, M&ast;.</note>, es hann drap skógar-bi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a64.3>fyre þat es hann hafðe biteð geit hans. Þar um es þetta kveðit:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a64.5>Berse bvin-razi beit geit fyr Heriolfe:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a64.6>en Heriolfr hokin-raze<note place=apparatus id=an64.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hokin-]</ab> holkin-, Cd.</note> hefnde geitr á<note place=apparatus id=an64.4><ab type=textRef>geitr á]</ab> S; geit við, Cd.</note> bersa.
</lg>

<p n=7.7.2><anchor id=a64.7>Þá vas Heriolfr tolf vettra es hann hefnde f&aolig;ðor síns. Hann <anchor id=a64.8>vas enn meste afreks-maðr:

<p n=7.8><anchor id=a64.9><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Heriolfr fór til Íslannz í elle sínne, ok nam land miðle <anchor id=a64.10>Búlannz-h&aolig;fða ok Kirkju-fiarðar; hans son vas Þorsteinn Kol&shy;skeggr,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a64.11>faðer Þórolfs, f&aolig;ðor Þorarens (ens) Svarta Máf-hlíðings, <anchor id=a64.12>ok Goðnýjar es átte Vermundr enn Mióve; þeirra son vas Brandr <anchor id=a64.13>enn Orve, ok dótter<note place=apparatus id=an64.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dótter]</ab> add. S.</note> Þórfinna, es átte Þórsteinn Cugga son.


<p n=8.1><anchor id=a64.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Vestarr, son Þórolfs Bloðro-skalla; hann átte Svono<note place=apparatus id=an64.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> S; Sponu, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a64.15>Herr&oelig;ðar dóttor: þeirra son Ásgeirr. Vestarr fór<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a64.16>til Íslannz með f&aolig;ðor sínn af-gamlan, ok nam Eyrar-land, ok á <anchor id=a64.17>miðle Kirkio-fiarðar ok Kolgrafar-fiarðar, ok bió á Öndorðre-Eyre.<note place=apparatus id=an64.7><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> nam Eyrar-land ok Kirkju-fiorð, ok bió..., S.</note> <anchor id=a64.18>Þeir Þórolfr feðgar ero báðer heygðer á Skalla-nese.

<p n=8.1.1><anchor id=a64.19>Ásgeirr Vestars son átte Helgo Ceallacs dóttor. Þeirra son vas <anchor id=a64.20>Þórlákr; hans son var Steinþórr ok þeirra Þórríðar dóttor Auðunnar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a64.21>Stota<note place=apparatus id=an64.8><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok þeirra ... Stota]</ab> add. S.</note>; ok Þórðr Blígr, es átte Oddcotlo, Þorvallz dóttor, Þor&shy;mods <anchor id=a65.1><pb id=pb65 n=65><note place=margin>[92: ii. 10.]</note>sonar Goða<note place=apparatus id=an65.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þormods s. Goða]</ab> add. S.</note>; ok Þórmóðr es átte Þorgerðe dóttor Þórbranz <anchor id=a65.2>or Alfta-firðe: fiórðe vas Bergþórr es fell á Vigra-firðe. Steinþórr <anchor id=a65.3>átte Þórríðe dóttor Þorgils Ara sonar; Gunnlaugr vas son þeirra, <anchor id=a65.4>es átte Þórríðe ena Sp&aolig;ko, dóttor Snorra Goða.

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a65.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Colr hét maðr, es nam land útan (frá) Fiarðar-horne til<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a65.6>Trolla-hals, ok út um Berserks-eyre til Hrauns-fiarðar. Hans son <anchor id=a65.7>vas Þórarenn ok Þórgrímr&mdash;Við þá es kent Collzsona-fell&mdash;Þeir <anchor id=a65.8>feðgar bioggo aller at Kol-gr&aolig;fom&mdash;Frá þeim ero Kolgreflingar <anchor id=a65.9>komner.

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a65.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Auðunn Stote son Vala ens Sterka, hann átte Myrunu dóttor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a65.11>Beadmacs<note place=apparatus id=an65.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Beadmacs]</ab> Maddaðar, S.</note> Íra-konungs. Hann nam Hrauns-fi&aolig;rð allan fyr ofan <anchor id=a65.12>hraun, á miðle Svína-vatz ok Trolla-hals; hann bió í Hrauns-firðe, <anchor id=a65.13>ok vas mikill fyr ser ok sterkr<note place=apparatus id=an65.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok vas ... sterkr]</ab> add. S.</note>&mdash;<corr sic="Þadan" resp=errata>þaðan</corr> ero Straum-firðingar komner.

<p n=8.4><anchor id=a65.14><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hann sá um haust, at hestr apal-grár hlióp ofan frá &lsquo;Hardns&rsquo;-vatne<note place=apparatus id=an65.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Thus Cd.; hiarðar-vatne, S.</note> <anchor id=a65.15>ok til stóð-hrossa hans; sá hafðe under stóð-hestenn. Þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a65.16>fór Auðunn til, ok tók enn grá hest, ok sette fyr tveggja yxna sleða, <anchor id=a65.17>ok ók saman alla t&aolig;ðo sína. Hestrenn vas góðr með-ferðar um há&shy;deget; <anchor id=a65.18>en es á leið, steig<note place=apparatus id=an65.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>steig]</ab> S; ste, Cd.</note> hann í <corr sic="v&aolig;llen" resp=errata>v&aolig;llenn</corr> harðan til hóf-skeggja. <anchor id=a65.19>En efter sólar-fall sleit hann allan reiðing, ok hlióp til vatz upp<note place=apparatus id=an65.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vatz upp]</ab> vatzins, S.</note>; <anchor id=a65.20>hann sásk ecke síðan.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=8.5><anchor id=a65.21><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Son Auðunnar vas Steinn, faðer Helgo, es átte An<hi>n</hi> í Hraune. <anchor id=a66.1><pb id=pb66 n=66><note place=margin>[94: ii. 11.]</note>Þeirra son Már, faðer Goðríðar, móðor Ceartans, ok Ánar í Kirkjo-felle: <anchor id=a66.2>Ásbi&aolig;rn hét annarr son Auðunnar: þriðe Svarth&aolig;fðe; en <anchor id=a66.3>dótter Þórríðr es átte Steinþórr á Eyre; þeirra son Þórlákr.


<p n=9.1><anchor id=a66.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Biorn</hi> hét son Ketils Flatnefs, ok Yngvildar dóttor <anchor id=a66.5>Ketils Veðrs af Hringa-ríke hersiss. Bi&aolig;rn sat efter<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a66.6>at eignom f&aolig;ðor síns þá es Ketill fór til Suðreyja. En es Ketell <anchor id=a66.7>hélt sk&aolig;ttom fyr Harallde konunge enom Hárfagra, þá rak konungr <anchor id=a66.8>Bi&aolig;rn son hans af eignom, ok tók under sik. Þá fór Bi&aolig;rn vestr um <anchor id=a66.9>haf, ok vilde þar ecke stadfestask, ok eige við Cristne taka sem <anchor id=a66.10>&aolig;nnor b&aolig;rn Ketils.&mdash;Því vas hann kallaðr Bi&aolig;rn enn Austr&oeacute;ne.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a66.11>Hann átte Geaflaugo Ceallacs-dóttor, systor Biarnar ens Sterka.

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a66.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Bi&aolig;rn enn Austr&oeacute;ne fór til Íslannz, ok nam land miðle <anchor id=a66.13>Hraun-fiarðar ok Stafs-ár, ok bió í Biarnar-h&aolig;fn á Borgar-hollte, <anchor id=a66.14>ok hafðe sel-f&aolig;r upp til Selja, ok átte rausnar-bú. Hann dó í <anchor id=a66.15>Biarnar-h&aolig;fn, ok vas heygðr við Borgar-l&oeacute;k<note place=apparatus id=an66.1><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Borgar-l&oeacute;k]</ab> því at hann einn var óskírðr barna Ketils Flatnefs, add. S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=9.3><anchor id=a66.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Son þeirra Biarnar ok Giaflaugar vas Ceallacr enn Gamle, es <anchor id=a66.17>bió í Biarnar-h&aolig;fn efter f&aolig;ðor sínn; ok Óttarr, faðer Biarnar, <anchor id=a66.18>f&aolig;ðor Vígfúss í Drápo-hlíð, es Snorre Goðe lét drepa. Annarr <anchor id=a66.19>son Óttars vas Helge; hann herjaðe á Skottland, ok feck<note place=apparatus id=an66.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>feck]</ab> tók, S.</note> þar at <anchor id=a66.20>herfange Niðbiorgo, dóttor Beolans konungs ok Caðlínar, dóttor<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a67.1><pb id=pb67 n=67><note place=margin>[96: ii. 12.]</note>Gongo-Hrólfs; hann feck hennar; ok vas þeirra son Osvifr enn <anchor id=a67.2>Spake, ok Einarr Skálaglam, es drucknaðe á Einars-skere í Sela-sunde<note place=apparatus id=an67.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> S; Selja-, Cd.</note>, <anchor id=a67.3>ok kom ski&aolig;ldr hans á Skiald-ey, en feldr á Feldar-holm. <anchor id=a67.4>Einarr vas faðer Þórgerðar, móðor Herdísar, móðor Steins skaldz. <anchor id=a67.5>Osvifr átte Þórdíse dóttor Þióðolfs or H&aolig;fn; þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a67.6>Úspakr, faðer Ulfs Stallara <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Jons á Reyrvelle, f. Erlendz Hí&shy;mallda, <anchor id=a67.7>f. Eysteins Erki-byskops<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an67.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Jons ... Erki-byskops]</ab> om. S.</note>; ok Þórolfr, Torráðr, Einarr, <anchor id=a67.8>Þorkell, Þórbi&aolig;rn&mdash;þeir urðo seker um víg Ceartans Ólafs sonar,&mdash;ok <anchor id=a67.9>Goðrún, móðer Þórðar Kattar<note place=apparatus id=an67.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórðar Kattar]</ab> om. H. S counts backwards, Gellis ok B. ok Þorleiks, ok Þ. Kattar.</note>, ok Þórleiks, ok Bolla, ok Gelliss. <anchor id=a67.10>Vilgeirr hét son Bearnar ens Austr&oeacute;na.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=9.4><anchor id=a67.11><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ceallacr enn Gamle átte Ástríðe<note place=apparatus id=an67.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>átte Ástríðe]</ab> skipped in Cd.</note>, dóttor Hrolfs hersess ok <anchor id=a67.12>Ondóttar systor Olvéss Barna-karls. Þeirra son vas Þórgrímr <anchor id=a67.13>Goðe; hans syner Víga-Styrr, ok Vermundr Mióve, ok Brandr <anchor id=a67.14>faðer Þórleiks<note place=apparatus id=an67.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>faðer Þórleiks]</ab> S; &pmacr; Þorleiks s., Cd.</note>. Dótter Ceallacs ens Gamla vas Gerðr es Þormóðr <anchor id=a67.15>Goðe átte, ok Helga es Ásgeirr á Eyre átte.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>


<p n=10.1><anchor id=a67.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórolfr</hi>, son Ornolfs Fisk-reka, bió í Mostr&mdash;því <anchor id=a67.17>vas hann kallaðr Mostrar-skegg.&mdash;Hann vas blót-maðr <anchor id=a67.18>mikill, ok trúðe á Þór. Hann fór fyr ofríke Harallz konungs <anchor id=a67.19>til Íslannz ok siglðe fyr sunnan land. En es hann kom vestr fyr <anchor id=a67.20>Breiða-fi&aolig;rð, skaut hann &aolig;ndoges-súlom sínom fyr borð&mdash;þar vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a67.21>skorenn á Þórr.&mdash;Hann mælte svá fyrer, at Þórr skylde þar á land <anchor id=a68.1><pb id=pb68 n=68><note place=margin>[97: ii. 12.]</note>koma, sem hann vilde at Þórolfr bygðe. Hét hann því, at helga <anchor id=a68.2>Þór allt land-nám sítt ok kenna við hann. Þórolfr siglðe inn á <anchor id=a68.3>Breiða-fi&aolig;rð, ok gaf nafn firðenom. Hann tók land fyr sunnan <anchor id=a68.4>(fiorðenn) nær miðjom. Þar fann hann Þór rekenn í neseno<note place=apparatus id=an68.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> í nesi einu, S.</note>&mdash;þar <anchor id=a68.5>heiter nú Þórs-nes&mdash;þeir lendo þar inn frá í vágenn, es Þórolfr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a68.6>kallaðe Hofs-vág. Þar reiste hann b&oeacute; sínn; ok g&oelig;rðe þar hof <anchor id=a68.7>mikit, ok helgaðe Þór&mdash;þar heita nú Hof-staðer. Fi&aolig;rðrenn vas <anchor id=a68.8>þá nær ecke bygðr.

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a68.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þórolfr nam land frá Stafs-&aoacute; inn til Þórs-ár, ok kallaðe þat <anchor id=a68.10>allt Þórs-nes. Hann hafðe svá mikinn átrúnað á fialle því<note place=apparatus id=an68.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> á fiall þat, S.</note> es stóð<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a68.11>í neseno, es hann kallaðe Helga-fell<note place=apparatus id=an68.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> -fiall, Cd.</note>, at þangat skylde eingi maðr <anchor id=a68.12>óþvegenn líta. Ok svá vas þar mikil frið-helge, at þar skyllde <anchor id=a68.13>&oelig;ngo granda í fialleno, hvárke fé né m&aolig;nnom, nema sialft genge <anchor id=a68.14>braut. Þat vas trua þeirra Þórolfs frænda, at þeir d&oeacute;e aller í <anchor id=a68.15>fiallet.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=10.3><anchor id=a68.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þar á neseno es Þórr kom á land, hafðe Þórolfr dóma alla; <anchor id=a68.17>ok þar vas sett heraðs-þing með ráðe allra sveitar-manna.  En <anchor id=a68.18>es menn vóro þar á þinge, þá skylde eigi<note place=apparatus id=an68.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eigi]</ab> víst eigi, S.</note> hafa alf-reka á lande, <anchor id=a68.19>ok vas ætlat til þess sker eitt þat es þeir k&aolig;lloðo Drit-sker; því at <anchor id=a68.20>þeir vildo eige saurga<note place=apparatus id=an68.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> First written &lsquo;saurgast,&rsquo; and st blotted out.</note> láta svá helgan v&aolig;ll.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=10.4><anchor id=a68.21><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En þá es Þórolfr vas dauðr, en Þorsteinn son hans vas ungr, <anchor id=a69.1><pb id=pb69 n=69><note place=margin>[99: ii. 13.]</note>þá vildo þeir Þórgrímr Ceallacs son ok Ásgeirr mágr hans eige <anchor id=a69.2>ganga í skeret &oelig;rna sínna; ok þolðo eige Þórs-nesingar þat, es <anchor id=a69.3>þeir vildo saurga svá helgan v&aolig;ll.  Því b&aolig;rðosk þeir Þórsteinn <anchor id=a69.4>Þorska-bítr ok Þórgeirr Cengr við þá Þórgrím ok Ásgeir þar á <anchor id=a69.5>þinge um skeret; ok fello þar nockorer menn; en marger urðo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a69.6>sárer, áðr þeir urðo skilðer. Þórðr Geller sætte þá. Ok með því <anchor id=a69.7>at hvárger vildo láta af síno mále, ok þá vas<note place=apparatus id=an69.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá vas]</ab> emend.; var þá, Cd. S; uhælgaðr, Cd.</note> v&aolig;llrenn uheilagr <anchor id=a69.8>af heiftar-blóðe, þá vas þat ráð teket, at f&oeacute;ra braut þaðan þinget, <anchor id=a69.9>ok inn í neset þar sem nú es. Vas þar þá helge-staðr mikill. Þar <anchor id=a69.10>stendr enn Þórs-steinn<note place=apparatus id=an69.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Þo<hi rend=sc>r</hi>stei<hi rend=sc>n</hi>, S.</note>, es þeir bruto þá menn um es þeir blótoðo;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a69.11>ok þar hiá es sá dóm-hringr es þeir d&oeacute;mðo menn til blóta<note place=apparatus id=an69.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>blóta]</ab> er menn skyldo til blótz dæma, S.</note>: þar <anchor id=a69.12>sette Þórðr Geller fiórðungs-þing með ráðe allra fiórðungs-manna.

<p n=10.5><anchor id=a69.13><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Son Þórolfs Mostrar-skeggs vas Hallsteinn Þorskafiarðar-goðe, <anchor id=a69.14>faðer Þórsteins Surtz ens Spaka&mdash;Ósc vas móðer Þórsteins Surtz, <anchor id=a69.15>dótter Þórsteins Rauðs. Annarr son Þórolfs vas Þorsteinn Þorska-bítr;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a69.16>hann átte Þóro, dóttor Áleifs Feilans, systor Þórðar Gelliss; <anchor id=a69.17>þeirra son vas Þórgrímr, faðer Snorra Goða, ok B&aolig;rkr enn Digre, <anchor id=a69.18>es vas faðer Sáms es Ásgeirr vá.


<p n=11.1><anchor id=a69.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Geirr&oelig;ðr</hi> hét maðr, es fór til Íslannz, ok með <anchor id=a69.20>hónom Finngeirr son Þórsteins Ondors, ok Ulfarr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a70.1><pb id=pb70 n=70><note place=margin>[100: ii. 13.]</note>kappe. Þeir fóro af Hálogalande til Íslannz. <corr sic="Geir&oelig;ðr">Geirr&oelig;ðr</corr> nam land <anchor id=a70.2>inn frá Þórs-&aoacute; til Langadals-ár. Hann bió á Eyre.

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a70.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Geirr&oelig;ðr gaf land Ulfare skipvera<note place=apparatus id=an70.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> S; skipara, Cd.</note> sínom tveim megin Ulfars-fellz, <anchor id=a70.4>ok fyr innan fiall.

<p n=11.3><anchor id=a70.5><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Geirr&oelig;ðr gaf Finngeire land um<note place=apparatus id=an70.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>um]</ab> uppi um, S.</note> Alfta-fi&aolig;rð. Hann bió<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a70.6>þar es nú heiter á Kárs-st&aolig;ðom. Hann vas faðer Þorfinnz, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a70.7>Þórbrannz í Alfta-firðe, es átte Þórbiorgo, dóttor Þórfinnz Sel-Þóris <anchor id=a70.8>sonar.

<p n=11.4><anchor id=a70.9><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Geirríðr hét syster Geirr&oelig;ðar<note place=apparatus id=an70.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Geirraðar, Cd.</note>, es átt hafðe Bi&aolig;rn, son Bolverks <anchor id=a70.10>Blindinga-trióno. Þórolfr hét son þeirra. Þau Geirríðr fóro<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a70.11>til Íslannz, efter lát Biarnar ok vóro enn fyrsta vettr á Eyre. Um <anchor id=a70.12>váret gaf Geirr&oelig;ðr systor sínne bú-stað í Borgar-dale; en Þórolfr <anchor id=a70.13>fór útan ok lagðesk í víking: Geirríðr sparðe ecke mat við menn, <anchor id=a70.14>ok lét g&oelig;ra skála sínn um þióð-braut þvera; hon sat á stóle, ok <anchor id=a70.15>laðaðe úte geste, en borð stóð inne iamnan ok matr á<note place=apparatus id=an70.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hon sat ... matr á]</ab> add. S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a70.16>Þórolfr fór til Íslannz efter andlát Geirríðar. Hann skoraðe á <anchor id=a70.17>Ulfar til landa, ok bauð holm-g&aolig;ngo.&mdash;Ulfarr vas gamall ok barn-lauss&mdash;hann <anchor id=a70.18>fell á holme; en Þórolfr varð sárr á f&oeacute;te, ok geck <anchor id=a70.19>iamnan haltr síðan&mdash;því vas hann B&oeacute;ge-fótr kallaðr.&mdash;Þórolfr tók <anchor id=a70.20>l&aolig;nd sum efter Ulfar, en sum Þórfinnr í Alfta-firðe, ok sette á<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a70.21>leysingja sína, Ulfar ok &OElig;rlyg.


<pb id=pb71 n=71><note place=margin>[102: ii. 13.]</note>

<p n=11.5><anchor id=a71.1><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Geirr&oelig;ðr á Eyre vas faðer Þórgeirs Cengs, es b&oelig;enn f&oeacute;rðe <anchor id=a71.2>or eyrenne upp under fiallet.  Hann vas faðer Þórðar, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a71.3>Atla.

<p><anchor id=a71.4>Þórolfr B&oelig;ge-fótr vas faðer Arnkels Goða, ok Geirríðar es átte <anchor id=a71.5>Þórolfr í Máva-hlíð, faðer Þórarens.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=11.6><anchor id=a71.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Syner Þórbrannz í Alftafirðe, sonar<note place=apparatus id=an71.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sonar]</ab> f. (i. e. foðors), Cd.; om. S.</note> Þorfinnz, vóro þeir Þórleifr <anchor id=a71.7>Cimbe, ok Þóroddr, Snorre, Þórfiðr, Illoge, Þórmóðr: þeir <anchor id=a71.8>deilðo við Arnkel Goða um arf leysingja sínna, ok vóro at víge <anchor id=a71.9>hans með Snorra Goða á &OElig;rlygs-st&aolig;ðom. Efter þat fór Þórleifr <anchor id=a71.10>Cimbe útan. Þá laust Arnbi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an71.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Arnbi&aolig;rn]</ab> hann, add. Cd., badly.</note>, son Ásbrannz or Breiða-vík, hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a71.11>með grautar-þv&aolig;ro; Cimbe brá á gaman. Þórðr Blígr brá hónom því <anchor id=a71.12>á Þórsness-þinge, es hann bað Helgo<note place=apparatus id=an71.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Helgo]</ab> add. S.</note> systor hans. Þá lét Cimbe <anchor id=a71.13>liósta Blíg með sand-torfo.&mdash;Af því g&aolig;rðosk deilor þeirra Eyrbyggja <anchor id=a71.14>ok Þórbrannz sona ok Snorra Goða. Þeir b&aolig;rðosk í <anchor id=a71.15>Geirv&aolig;r, ok í Alfta-firðe, ok á Vigra-firðe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=11.7><anchor id=a71.16><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þórbergr hét maðr es fór af Iafirðe til Íslannz, ok nam <anchor id=a71.17>Langa-dal hvárn-tveggja ok bió í enom ýtra. Hans son vas <anchor id=a71.18>Áslákr, es átte Arnleifo, dóttor Þórðar Gelliss: þeirra b&aolig;rn, Illoge <anchor id=a71.19>enn Ramme, ok Gunnildr es Breiðr átte fyrr, en síðarr Halldórr á <anchor id=a71.20>Holms-láttre. Illoge enn Ramme átte Goðleifo, dóttor Ketils<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a71.21>Smiðjo-drums; þeirra syner Eyjolfr, ok Eindriðe ok Collr, ok <anchor id=a71.22>Geller<note place=apparatus id=an71.4><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> S; H omits &lsquo;Eindriðe and Geller&rsquo;</note>; ok dótter Herþrúðr, es átte Þórgrímr Vermundar son ens <anchor id=a72.1><pb id=pb72 n=72><note place=margin>[103: ii. 14.]</note>Mióva; ok Friðgerðr, es Oddr Drafla son átte; ok Goðríðr, es <anchor id=a72.2>Bergr<note place=apparatus id=an72.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Bergr]</ab> Bergþor, S. Þorláks sonar] add. S.</note> Þórmóðar son átte, Þorláks sonar, en síðan I&aolig;rundr í Skora-dal; <anchor id=a72.3>ok Iódís, es átte Márr son Illoga Ara sonar; ok Arnleif, es <anchor id=a72.4>átte Colle<note place=apparatus id=an72.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Colle]</ab> Kollr, S.</note> son Þórðar Blígs&mdash;Frá Illoga ero Langd&oeacute;ler komner.

<p n=11.8><anchor id=a72.5><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Steinn Miok-siglande, son Vigbiods, bróðer Þóres Haust-myrks,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a72.6>nam Skógar-str&aolig;nd til mótz við Þórberg, ok inn til Lax-ár<note place=apparatus id=an72.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> -myrks, S.</note>; <anchor id=a72.7>hann bió á Breiða-bólstað. Hans son vas Þórhaddr es nam<note place=apparatus id=an72.4><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es nam]</ab> í, S.</note> <anchor id=a72.8>Hitardal, ok Þórgestr es átte Arnóro dóttor Þórðar Gelles; þeirra <anchor id=a72.9>syner Steinn L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr<note place=apparatus id=an72.5><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> logmaðr, Cd.</note>, ok Ásmundr ok Hafliðe ok <anchor id=a72.10>Þórhaddr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=12.1><anchor id=a72.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórvalðr</hi>, son Asvalldz, Ulfs sonar, Yxna-Þóres <anchor id=a72.12>sonar, ok Eirikr Rauðe son hans, fóro af Iaðre fyr <anchor id=a72.13>víga saker, ok n&aoacute;mo land á Horn-str&aolig;ndom, ok bioggo<note place=apparatus id=an72.6><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bioggo]</ab> S; bygðo, Cd.</note> at Dr&aolig;ngom. <anchor id=a72.14>Þar andaðezk Þórvaldr: Eirikr feck þá Þióðildar, dóttor I&aolig;rundar <anchor id=a72.15>Atla sonar, ok Þórbiargar Knarrar-bringo, es þá átte Þórbi&aolig;rn enn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a72.16>Hauk-d&oelig;lske. Rézk Eirikr þá norðan, ok rudde land<note place=apparatus id=an72.7><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> laund, S.</note> í Hauka-dale. <anchor id=a72.17>Hann bió á Eiriks-st&aolig;ðom hiá Vatz-horne.

<p><anchor id=a72.18>Þá felldo þrælar Eiriks skriðo á b&oeacute; Valþiófs á Valþiófs-st&aolig;ðom; <anchor id=a72.19>en Eyjolfr Saurr, frænde hans, drap þrælana hiá Skeiðs-breckom <anchor id=a72.20>upp frá Vatz-horne. Fyr þat vá Eirikr Eyjolf Saur; hann vá ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a73.1><pb id=pb73 n=73><note place=margin>[104: ii. 14.]</note>Holmg&aolig;ngo-Hrafn at Leik-sk&aoacute;lom. Geirsteinn ok Oddr á I&aolig;rva, <anchor id=a73.2>frændr Eyjolfs, mælto efter hann. Vas þá Eirikr g&oelig;rr or Hauka-dale. <anchor id=a73.3>Hann nam þá Brok-ey ok &OElig;xn-ey, ok bió hann at T&aolig;ðom<note place=apparatus id=an73.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Tauðom, S.</note> í <anchor id=a73.4>Suðrey enn fyrsta vettr.

<p n=12.2><anchor id=a73.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þá léðe hann Þórgeste set-stocka. Síðan fór Eirikr í &OElig;xn-ey<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a73.6>ok bió á Eriks-st&aolig;ðom. Þá heimte hann set-stocka sína ok náðe <anchor id=a73.7>eige. Eirikr sótte set-stocka á Breiða-bólstað; en Þórgestr fór <anchor id=a73.8>efter hónom. Þeir b&aolig;rðosk skamt frá garðe at Dr&aolig;ngom. Þar <anchor id=a73.9>fello tveir syner Þorgestz, ok n&oelig;ckorer menn aðrer. Her efter <anchor id=a73.10>h&aolig;fðo hvárer-tveggjo seto. Styrr veitte Eirike ok Eyjolfr Æso<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a73.11>son<note place=apparatus id=an73.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Æso son]</ab> add. Eyrb. ch. 24.</note> ór Svíney, ok syner Þórbrannz or Alfta-firðe, ok Þórbi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a73.12>Vívils son: en Þórgeste veitto syner Þórðar Gelliss ok Þórgeirr or <anchor id=a73.13>Hitar-dale, Áslákr or Langa-dale, ok Illoge son hans. Þeir Eirikr <anchor id=a73.14>urðo seker á Þórsness-þinge. Hann bió skip í Eiriks-váge; en <anchor id=a73.15>Eyjolfr leynde hónom í Dimunar-váge meðan (þeir) Þórgestr leitaðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a73.16>hans of Eyjar. Þeir Þórbi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an73.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórbi&aolig;rn]</ab> Eric Red&apos;s Saga; Þorgeirr, H, S.</note> ok Eyjolfr ok Styrr fylgðo Eirike <anchor id=a73.17>út um Eyjar. Hann sagðe þeim, at hann ætlaðe at leita lannz <anchor id=a73.18>þess, es Gunnbi&aolig;rn, son Ulfs Kr&aoacute;ko, sá, es hann rak vestr um <anchor id=a73.19>Ísland, þá es hann fann Gunnbiarnar-sker. Hann kvazk aftr <anchor id=a73.20>mundo leita til vina sínna, ef hann fynde landet.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=12.3><anchor id=a73.21><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Eirikr siglðe undan Snæfellz-i&aolig;kle<note place=apparatus id=an73.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Sniofallz-, Cd.</note>, ok kom útan at Mið-i&aolig;kle <anchor id=a73.22>þar sem Blá-serkr heiter. Hann fór þaðan suðr með lande, at <anchor id=a74.1><pb id=pb74 n=74><note place=margin>[105: ii. 14.]</note>leita þess, ef þannig være byggjanda<note place=apparatus id=an74.1><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hann fór ... byggjanda]</ab> add. S.</note>. Hann siglðe vestr um <anchor id=a74.2>Hvarf<note place=apparatus id=an74.2><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hann siglðe vestr um Hvarf]</ab> om. S.</note>, ok vas enn fyrsta vettr í Eiriks-ey nær miðre enne<note place=apparatus id=an74.3><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>miðre enne]</ab> add. S, S&ast;. </note> Eystre-bygð<note place=apparatus id=an74.4><ab type=textRef>Eystre-]</ab> H, S&ast;; vestre, S (badly).</note>. <anchor id=a74.3>Um várit efter fór hann til Eiriks-fiarðar, ok tók ser þar <anchor id=a74.4>bústað<note place=apparatus id=an74.5><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bústað]</ab> Hann fór þat sumar í vestre Obygð, add. S.</note>, ok gaf víða &oelig;rnefne. Hann vas annan vettr í Eiriks-holmom <anchor id=a74.5>við Hvarfs-gnípo; en et þriðja sumar fór hann allt norðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a74.6>til Snæfellz, ok inn í Hrafns-fi&aolig;rð; þá lézk hann komenn fyr botn <anchor id=a74.7>Eiriks-fiarðar. Hvarf hann þá aftr, ok vas enn þriðja vettr í <anchor id=a74.8>Eiriksey fyr Eiriksfiarðar-minne.

<p n=12.4><anchor id=a74.9><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Efter um sumaret fór hann til Íslannz<note place=apparatus id=an74.6><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Íslannz]</ab> ok kom, add. S.</note>, í Breiða-fi&aolig;rð. Hann <anchor id=a74.10>vas þann vettr á Holms-láttre með Ingólfe. Um váret b&aolig;rðosk<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a74.11>þeir Eirikr ok Þórgestr, ok feck Eirikr ósigr. Efter þat vóro þeir <anchor id=a74.12>sætter.

<p n=12.5><anchor id=a74.13><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þat sumar fór Eirikr at byggja land þat es hann hafðe fundet, <anchor id=a74.14>ok hann kallaðe Gr&oeacute;na-land&mdash;þvi at hann sagðe þat menn mundo <anchor id=a74.15>miok fýsa þangat, at landet héte vel.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=12.6><anchor id=a74.16><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Svá seger Are Þorgils son<note place=apparatus id=an74.7><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Sva segja fróðer menn, S.</note>, at þat sumar fóro fimm skip ok <anchor id=a74.17>tottogo til Gr&oelig;na-lannz af Borgar-firðe ok Breiða-firðe. En fiórtán <anchor id=a74.18>kómosk út; sum rak aftr, en sum týndosk&mdash;þat vas sextán<note place=apparatus id=an74.8><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sextán]</ab> xv, S.</note> vettrom <anchor id=a74.19>fyrr an Cristne være í l&aolig;g teken á Íslande.

<p n=12.7><anchor id=a74.20><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Heriolfr hét maðr, son Bárðar Heriolfs sonar, frænda Ingolfs<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a74.21>land-náma-mannz: þeim Heriolfe gaf Ingolfr land á miðle Vágs ok <pb id=pb75 n=75><note place=margin>[106: ii. 14.]</note>Reykja-ness. Heriolfr enn yngre<note place=apparatus id=an75.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>frænda ... yngre]</ab> S.</note> fór til Gr&oeacute;na-lannz með Eirike.<note place=apparatus id=an75.2><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Heriolfs sonar; hann fór til Gr., H.</note> <anchor id=a75.1>Með hónom vas á skipe Suðreyskr maðr Cristenn, sá es orte Hafgerðingja-dr&aoacute;po. <anchor id=a75.2>Þar es þetta stef í<corr>:</corr>&mdash;

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a75.3>Mínar bið ek munka reyne meina-lausan farar beina:
    <l><anchor id=a75.5>Heiðis halde hárrar foldar hallar dróttenn yfer mer stalle.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
</lg>

<p n=12.7.1><anchor id=a75.6>Heriolfr nam Heriolfs-fi&aolig;rð, ok bió á Heriolfs-nese; hann vas enn <anchor id=a75.7>g&aolig;fgaste maðr.

<p n=12.8><anchor id=a75.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Eirikr Rauðe nam Eiriks-fi&aolig;rð, ok bió í Bratta-hlíð; en <anchor id=a75.9>Leifr son hans efter hann.

<p n=12.9><anchor id=a75.10><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Þessar menn n&aoacute;mo land á Gr&oeacute;na-lande<note place=apparatus id=an75.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> er þa fóro út með Eir., S.</note>, ok fóro út með<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a75.11>Eirike: Heriolfr Heriolfs-fi&aolig;rð; hann bió á Heriolfs-nese<note place=apparatus id=an75.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Heriolfr ... Heriolfs-nese]</ab> add. S.</note>: Ketell <anchor id=a75.12>Ketils-fi&aolig;rð: Hrafn Hrafns-fi&aolig;rð: Solve Solva-dal: Snorre Þórbrannz <anchor id=a75.13>son Alfta-fi&aolig;rð: Þórbi&aolig;rn Glora Siglo-fi&aolig;rð: Einarr Einars-fi&aolig;rð: <anchor id=a75.14>Hafgrímr Hafgríms-fi&aolig;rð ok Vatna-hverfe: Arnlaugr Arnlaugs-fi&aolig;rð. <anchor id=a75.15>En sumer fóro til Vestre-bygðar.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=12.10><anchor id=a75.16><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Maðr hét Þorkell Far-serkr, systrungr Eiriks Rauða. Hann <anchor id=a75.17>fór til Gr&oelig;n<hi>a</hi>-lannz með Eirike, ok nam Hvals-eyjar-(fi&aolig;rð) <anchor id=a75.18>miðle ok<note place=apparatus id=an75.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>miðle ok]</ab> ok miðle, Cd.; ok víðast milli, S.</note> Eiriks-fiarðar, ok bió í Hvals-eyjar-firðe. Frá hónom ero <anchor id=a75.19>Hvals-eyjar-firðingar<note place=apparatus id=an75.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hvals-eyjar-firðingar]</ab> thus H and S.</note> komner. Hann vas ramm-aukenn miok. <anchor id=a75.20>Hann lagðesk efter geldinge g&aolig;mlom út í Hvalsey, ok flutte útan<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a75.21>á bake ser, þá es hann vilde fagna Eirike frænda sínom; en ecki <anchor id=a76.1><pb id=pb76 n=76><note place=margin>[108: ii. 15.]</note>vas sió-f&oelig;rt<note place=apparatus id=an76.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> sæ-færi, S.</note> skip heima&mdash;þat es l&aolig;ng h&aolig;lf vika: Þórkell es dysjaðr <anchor id=a76.2>í túne í Hvals-eyjar-firðe, ok hefer iamnan síðan genget þar um <anchor id=a76.3>sýslor<note place=apparatus id=an76.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sýslor]</ab> hýbýli, S.</note>.


<p n=13.1><anchor id=a76.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ingolfr</hi> enn Sterke ok Þórvalldr, syner Ána, Avallz <anchor id=a76.5>s(onar) Ongt-í-brióste, n&aoacute;mo land inn frá Lax-&aoacute; til<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a76.6>Skra<hi>u</hi>mu-laups-á<hi>r</hi>, ok bioggo<note place=apparatus id=an76.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bioggo]</ab> bió, Cd.</note> á Holms-látre<note place=apparatus id=an76.4><ab type=textRef>Holms-látre]</ab> S; Hvallátre, Cd.</note>. Son Þorvallz vas Þorleifr, <anchor id=a76.7>faðer Halldórs, es átte Gunnilde síðar, dóttor Ásláks Hroars <anchor id=a76.8>sonar or Langa-dale. Þeirra son Þórer, es átte Hallveigo, Tinnz <anchor id=a76.9>dóttor, Hallkels sonar. Þeirra son Brandr, es átte Þorgerðe <anchor id=a76.10>Brannz dóttor. Þeirra son vas Halldórr, es átte Þórk&aolig;tlo Þorgríms<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a76.11>dótter. Þeirra son Brandr prior enn Fróðe, es mest hefer <anchor id=a76.12>skrifat Borgfirðinga-kynslóð<note place=apparatus id=an76.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Borgfirðinga-]</ab> emend. by conj.; Breidfirðinga kynsloð, H.</note>.


<p n=14.1><anchor id=a76.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc><corr sic="Oleifr">Óleifr</corr></hi> enn <hi rend=sc>Hvíte</hi> hét her-konungr. Hann vas son <anchor id=a76.14>Ingiallz konungs, Helga sonar, Óleifs<note place=apparatus id=an76.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Olafs, Cd.</note> (sonar), Goðr&oelig;ðar <anchor id=a76.15>sonar, Halfdanar sonar Hvítbeins Upplendinga konungs.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a76.16>Óleifr enn Hvíte herjaðe í vestr-víking, ok vann Dyflinni á Írlande, <anchor id=a76.17>ok Dyflinnar-skíre, ok g&oelig;rðesk þar konungr yfer; hann feck Auðar <anchor id=a76.18>ennar Diúp-úðgo<note place=apparatus id=an76.7><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-úðgo]</ab> -auðgu, S.</note>, dóttor Ketels Flat-nefs, Biarnar sonar Buno, ágætz <anchor id=a76.19>mannz í Norege<note place=apparatus id=an76.8>Biarnar sonar ... Norege] add. S&ast;.</note>; Þórsteinn Rauðr hét son þeirra. Óleifr fell á Írlande <anchor id=a76.20>í orrosto; en (þau)<note place=apparatus id=an76.9><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þau]</ab> Eric Red&apos;s Saga.</note> Auðr ok Þórsteinn fóro þá í Suðreyjar; þar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a77.1><pb id=pb77 n=77><note place=margin>[109: ii. 16.]</note>feck Þórsteinn Þórríðar, dóttor Eyvindar Austmannz, systor Helga <anchor id=a77.2>ens Magra: þau &aoacute;tto m&aolig;rg b&aolig;rn: Óleifr Feilan hét son þeirra, <anchor id=a77.3>en d&oelig;ttr<note place=apparatus id=an77.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> dótter, Cd. Olof, Cd.</note>, Groa, ok Álof, Osk, Þórilldr, Þórgerðr, ok Vígdís. <anchor id=a77.4>Þórsteinn g&oelig;rðesk her-konungr, ok rézk til lags<note place=apparatus id=an77.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lags]</ab> S&ast;; (Eric Red&apos;s Saga); liðs, Cd.; felags, S.</note> með Sigr&oelig;ðe<note place=apparatus id=an77.3><ab type=textRef>Sigr&oelig;ðe]</ab> Sigurðe, S; om. Cd.</note> <anchor id=a77.5>iarle enom Rík<hi>j</hi>a, syne Eysteins Glumro. Þeir unno Cata-nes ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a77.6>Suðrland, Ros ok Merævi<note place=apparatus id=an77.4><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Me<hi rend=sc>r</hi>hæfi, S.</note>, ok meirr an halft Skot<hi>t</hi>land; vas <anchor id=a77.7>Þorsteinn þar konungr yfer, áðr Skot<hi>t</hi>ar sviko hann, ok fell hann <anchor id=a77.8>þar í orrosto.

<p n=14.2><anchor id=a77.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Auðr vas<note place=apparatus id=an77.5><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas]</ab> g&oelig;rðesk, S.</note> þá á Cata-nese es hon spurðe fall Þórsteins. Hon <anchor id=a77.10>let g&oelig;ra kn&aolig;rr í skóge á laun; en es hon<note place=apparatus id=an77.6><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hon]</ab> hann, S.</note> vas buen, hélt hon út<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a77.11>í Orkneyjar: þar gifte hon Gró dóttor Þórsteins Rauðs; hon vas <anchor id=a77.12>móðer Greladar, es Þórfinnr Hausa-kliúfr átte. Efter þat fór Auðr <anchor id=a77.13>at leita Íslannz; hon hafðe á skipe með ser tottogo karla frialsa.

<p n=14.3><anchor id=a77.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Collr hét maðr, Veðrar-Gríms son, Ása sonar hersiss: hann <anchor id=a77.15>hafðe forr&aoacute;ð með Auðe, ok vas mest virðr af henne: Collr átte<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a77.16>Þórgerðe, dóttor Þórsteins Rauðs.

<p n=14.4><anchor id=a77.17><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Erpr hét leysinge Auðar; hann vas son Melduns iarls af <anchor id=a77.18>Skot<hi>t</hi>lande, þess es fell fyrer Sigr&oelig;ðe<note place=apparatus id=an77.7><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Sígurðe, Cd. Ríka, Cd.</note> iarle enom Ríkja. Móðer <anchor id=a77.19>Erps vas Myrgiol, dótter Gliomals Íra-konungs. Sigr&oelig;ðr iarl tók <anchor id=a77.20>þau at herfange, ok þiáðe. Myrgiol vas ambótt kono iarls, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a78.1><pb id=pb78 n=78><note place=margin>[110: ii. 16.]</note>þiónaðe henne trúlega; hon vas margs kunnande; hon varð-veitte <anchor id=a78.2>barn dróttningar úboret meðan hon vas í laugo<note place=apparatus id=an78.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>laugo]</ab> thus H and S; read hauptom?</note>. Síðan keypte <anchor id=a78.3>Auðr hána dýrt, ok hét henne frelse, ef hon þiónaðe svá Þórríðe <anchor id=a78.4>kono Þórsteins Rauðs sem dróttningo: þau Myrgiol ok Erpr son <anchor id=a78.5>hennar fóro til Íslannz með Auðe.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=14.5><anchor id=a78.6><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Auðr hélt fyrst til Færeyja, ok gaf þar Álofo<note place=apparatus id=an78.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Alofu, S.</note>, dóttor Þórsteins <anchor id=a78.7>Rauðs&mdash;þaðan ero G&aolig;to-skeggjar komner.

<p n=14.6><anchor id=a78.8><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Síðan fór hon at leita Íslannz, ok kom á Vikrar-skeið<note place=apparatus id=an78.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Vikars-, Cd.; Vikrar-, S.</note> ok braut <anchor id=a78.9>þar. Fór hon á Kialar-nes til Helga Biolo bróðor síns. Hann <anchor id=a78.10>bauð henne þar með helminge<note place=apparatus id=an78.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> helming, S (better).</note> liðe síns; en henne þótte þat vesa<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a78.11>van-boðet, ok kvað hann lenge lítil-menne vesa mondo. Hon fór <anchor id=a78.12>þá vestr á<note place=apparatus id=an78.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á]</ab> í, S.</note> Breiða-fi&aolig;rð til Biarnar bróðor síns; hann geck móte <anchor id=a78.13>henne með húskarla sína; ok létzk kunna veg-lynde systor sínnar, <anchor id=a78.14>ok bauð henne með alla sína menn. Þat þá hon.

<p n=14.7><anchor id=a78.15><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Efter um váret fóro þau Auðr í Breiða-fi&aolig;rð inn í landa-leitan;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a78.16>þau &aoacute;to<note place=apparatus id=an78.6><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&aoacute;to]</ab> atto, Cd.</note> d&aolig;gorð fyr sunnan<note place=apparatus id=an78.7><ab type=textRef>sunnan]</ab> norðan, S.</note> Breiða-fi&aolig;rð þar sem nú heiter <anchor id=a78.17>D&aolig;gorðar-nes. Síðan fóro þau inn um Eyja-sund. Þau lendo <anchor id=a78.18>við nes þat es Auðr tapaðe kambe sínom&mdash;þat kallaðe hon <anchor id=a78.19>Kambs-nes.

<p n=14.8><anchor id=a78.20><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Auðr nam &aolig;ll Dala-l&aolig;nd<note place=apparatus id=an78.8><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Dala-l&aolig;nd]</ab> here two leaves are missing in H, covering the remnant of this chapter and the whole of the 16th; thus far the text is therefore taken from S.</note> í innan-verðom firðenom frá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a79.1><pb id=pb79 n=79><note place=margin>[III: ii. 17.]</note>D&aolig;gorðar-&aoacute; til Skraumo-hlaups-ár. Hon bió í Hvamme við <anchor id=a79.2>Aurriða-ár-ós&mdash;þat heita Auðar-tofter. Hon hafðe b&oeacute;na-hald sítt <anchor id=a79.3>á Cross-hólom. Þar lét hon reisa crossa; þvi at hon vas skírð ok <anchor id=a79.4>vel truoð. Þar h&aolig;fðo frændr hennar síðan átrúnað mikinn á <anchor id=a79.5>hólana; vas þar g&oelig;rr h&aolig;rg<hi>r</hi><note place=apparatus id=an79.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þar g&oelig;rr h&aolig;rgr]</ab> þá gor haurg, S.</note>, es blót tóko til<corr resp=errata> trúðo þeir því at þeir dæe í hólana</corr>; ok þar vas Þórðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a79.6>Geller leiddr í, áðr syner hans t&oeacute;ke mann-virðing<note place=apparatus id=an79.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>áðr syner hans t&oeacute;ke m.]</ab> emend.; áðr &hstrok; tok, S (aðr . ss. &hstrok; . t&oelig;ke, Archetype); S&ast; omits the clause.</note>: sem seger í <anchor id=a79.7>S&aolig;go hans.


<p n=15.1><anchor id=a79.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Auðr</hi> gaf land skipverjom sínom ok leysingjom.

<p n=15.2><anchor id=a79.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Cetill hét maðr es hon gaf land frá Skraumo-hlaups-&aoacute; <anchor id=a79.10>til H&aolig;rðadals-ár. Hann bió á Cetils-st&aolig;ðom; hann vas<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a79.11>faðer Vestliða, ok Einars, f&aolig;ðor Cleppiarns, ok Þórbiarnar, es <anchor id=a79.12>Styrr vá; ok Þórdísar, móðor Þórgestz.

<p n=15.3><anchor id=a79.13><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> H&aolig;rðr hét skipvere Auðar; hónom gaf hon H&aolig;rða-dal<note place=apparatus id=an79.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Spelt Haurdr and Haurdadal, S.</note>. <anchor id=a79.14>Hans son vas Ásbi&aolig;rn, es átte Þórbi&aolig;rgo, dóttor Miðfiardar-Skeggja: <anchor id=a79.15>þeirra b&aolig;rn, Hnake; hann átte Þórgerðe, dóttor Þórgeirs<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a79.16>H&oelig;ggvin-kinna; ok Ingebi&aolig;rg, es Illoge enn Svarte átte<note place=apparatus id=an79.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>átte]</ab> blank for a line left in S.</note>.

<p n=15.4><anchor id=a79.17><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Vívill<note place=apparatus id=an79.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Vifill, S here.</note> hét leysinge Auðar. Hann spurðe þess Auðe, hví hon <anchor id=a79.18>gaf hónom &oelig;ngan bústað sem &aolig;ðrom m&aolig;nnom. Hon kvað þat <anchor id=a79.19>&oelig;ngo<note place=apparatus id=an79.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&oelig;ngo]</ab> S&ast;; eigi, S.</note> skipta, kvað hann þar g&aolig;fgan mundo þickja sem hann være. <anchor id=a80.1><pb id=pb80 n=80><note place=margin>[112: ii. 17.]</note>Hónom gaf hon Vívils-dal. Þar bió hann, ok átte deilor við <anchor id=a80.2>H&aolig;rð: son Vívils<note place=apparatus id=an80.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>son Vívils]</ab> hann átte þá kono es het (blank); þeirra syner, etc., S&ast; (Eric Red&apos;s Saga).</note> vas Þorbi&aolig;rn, faðer Goðríðar es átte Þorsteinn <anchor id=a80.3>son Eiriks ens Rauða, en síðarr Þórfinnr Carls-emne. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Frá þeim <anchor id=a80.4>ero byscopar komner, Bi&aolig;rn, Þórlákr, Brandr.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi> Annarr son Vívils <anchor id=a80.5>vas Þórgeirr, es átte Arnóro, dóttor Lón-Einars<note place=apparatus id=an80.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Lón-Einars]</ab> thus S; read Laugar-brecko-Einars.</note>. Þeirra dótter<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a80.6>Yngvilldr, es átte Þórsteinn son Snorra Goða.

<p n=15.5><anchor id=a80.7><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hunde hét leysinge Auðar, Skotzkr; hónom gaf hon Hunda-dal. <anchor id=a80.8>Þar bió hann lenge.

<p n=15.6><anchor id=a80.9><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> S&oelig;ckolfr<note place=apparatus id=an80.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> S&ast;; Saud-kolfr, S (badly); spelt <hi>au</hi> in S.</note> hét leysinge Auðar; hónom gaf hon S&oelig;ckolfs-dal: <anchor id=a80.10>hann bió á Breiða-bólstað, ok es mart manna frá hónom komet<note place=apparatus id=an80.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>komet]</ab> the last line of the paragraph left blank in S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=15.7><anchor id=a80.11><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Erpe syne Mellduns iarls, es fyr vas geteð, gaf Auðr frelse, <anchor id=a80.12>ok Sauðafellz-l&aolig;nd.&mdash;Frá hónom ero Erplingar komner. Ormr <anchor id=a80.13>het son Erps: annarr Gunnbi&aolig;rn, faðer Arnóro es átte Kolbeinn <anchor id=a80.14>Þórðar son: þriðe Ásgeirr, faðer Þór&aolig;rno, es átte Sumarliðe <anchor id=a80.15>Hrapps son: dótter Erps vas Halldís, es átte Alfr í D&aolig;lom:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a80.16>Dufnall vas enn son Erps, faðer Þórkels, f&aolig;ðor Hiallta, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a80.17>Beines: Skate<note place=apparatus id=an80.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Skate]</ab> thus S, as it seems.</note> vas enn son Erps, faðer Þórðar, f&aolig;ðor Gísla, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a80.18>Þórgerðar.

<pb id=pb81 n=81><note place=margin>[113: ii. 18.]</note>

<p n=15.8><anchor id=a81.1><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þórbi&aolig;rn hét maðr es bió at Vatne; hann átte ...<note place=apparatus id=an81.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>... ]</ab> blank for half a line in S.</note> ok vas <anchor id=a81.2>þeirra dótter Hallfríðr es átte H&aolig;scolldr í Laxár-dale; þau &aoacute;tto <anchor id=a81.3>m&aolig;rg b&aolig;rn: Bárðr vas son þeirra; ok Þórleikr, faðer Bolla, es <anchor id=a81.4>átte Goðrúno Osvifs dóttor. Þeirra syner vóro þeir Þórleikr, ok <anchor id=a81.5>H&aolig;sculldr, Surtr ok Bolle: Herdís ok Þórgerðr d&oeacute;ttr þeirra.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a81.6>Þórðr Ingunnar son átte fyrr Goðrúno, ok vóro þeirra b&aolig;rn, Þórðr <anchor id=a81.7>K&aolig;ttr ok Arnkatla: Þórkell Eyjolfs son átte Goðrúno síðast; þeirra <anchor id=a81.8>b&aolig;rn Geller ok Riúpa. Bárðr H&aolig;scullz son vas faðer Hallbiargar, <anchor id=a81.9>es átte Hallr son Víga-Styrs: Hallgerðr Snuin-bróc vas dótter <anchor id=a81.10>H&aolig;scullz, ok Þórgerðr, ok Þórríðr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=15.9><anchor id=a81.11><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> [Collr son Veðrar-Gríms nam Laxár]dal<note place=apparatus id=an81.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Collr ... Laxárdal]</ab> by emendation; left blank in S.</note> allt til Haukadals-ár. <anchor id=a81.12>Hann vas kallaðr Dala-Collr; hann átte Þórgerðe dóttor Þorsteins <anchor id=a81.13>Rauðs; b&aolig;rn þeirra vóro þau H&aolig;sculldr ok Groa, es átte Véleifr <anchor id=a81.14>enn Gamle; ok Þórkatla, es Þórgeirr Goðe átte. H&aolig;skulldr átte <anchor id=a81.15>Hallfríðe, dóttor Þórbiarnar frá Vatne; Þórleikr vas son þeirra;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a81.16>hann átte Þórríðe, dóttor Arnbiarnar, Sleito-Biarnar<note place=apparatus id=an81.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Slettu-, S.</note> sonar: þeirra <anchor id=a81.17>son vas Bolle. H&aolig;scolldr keypte Melcorco dóttor Myrceartans <anchor id=a81.18>Íra konungs. Þeirra son vas Óleifr<note place=apparatus id=an81.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Oláfr, S, here and below.</note> Páe, ok Helge. D&oelig;ttr H&aolig;scullz, <anchor id=a81.19>Þórríðr, ok Þórgerðr, ok Hallgerðr Snuin-bróc. Óleifr átte <anchor id=a81.20>Þórgerðe, dóttor Egils Skalla-Gríms sonar; þeirra son Ceartan<note place=apparatus id=an81.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ceartan]</ab> Egill, adds S&ast;.</note>, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a81.21>Halldórr, Steinþórr, ok Þorbergr: D&oeacute;ttr Óleifs, Þórríðr, Þórbi&aolig;rg <anchor id=a81.22>Digra, ok Bergþóra. Ceartan átte Hrefno, dóttor Ásgeirs Æðe-collz: <anchor id=a81.23>þeirra syner<note place=apparatus id=an81.6><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>syner]</ab> son (s. for ss.), S.</note>, Ásgeirr, ok Scúmr.

<pb id=pb82 n=82><note place=margin>[114: ii. 18.]</note>

<p n=15.9.1><anchor id=a82.1><ab type=parNum>9. b.</ab> [Laxd. S. ch. 31: Þórríðe átte Guðmundr Solmundar son í <anchor id=a82.2>Ásbiarnar-nese; Hallr hét son þeirra, ok Barðe, Steinn ok Steingrímr: <anchor id=a82.3>Guðrún hét dótter þeirra, ok Álof: Þorbi&aolig;rg Digra vas <anchor id=a82.4>gift vestr í Vatzfi&aolig;rð Ásgeire Knattar syne; hann vas g&aolig;fugr <anchor id=a82.5>maðr: þeirra son vas Ceartan, faðer Þórvaldz, foðor Þórðar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a82.6><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Snorra, f. Þorvaldz. Þaðan es komet Vatzfirdinga-kyn<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. <anchor id=a82.7>Síðan átte Þórbi&aolig;rgo Vermundr Þórgríms son; þeirra dótter Þór&shy;finna, <anchor id=a82.8>es átte Þorsteinn Cugga son: Bergþóra, dótter Óleifs vas <anchor id=a82.9>gift vestr í Diúpafi&aolig;rð Þórhalle Goða Odda syne<note place=apparatus id=an82.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Odda syne]</ab> add. Egils Saga.</note>. Þeirra son vas <anchor id=a82.10>Ceartan, faðer Smið-Sturlo; hann vas fóstre Þórðar Gils sonar.]<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=15.10><anchor id=a82.11><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Heriolfr, son Eyvindar Ellz, feck síðar Þórgerðar<note place=apparatus id=an82.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórgerðar]</ab> add. from Laxdæla Saga.</note> dóttor <anchor id=a82.12>Þórsteins Rauðs. Hrútr vas son þeirra; hónom gallt H&aolig;sculldr <anchor id=a82.13>í móðor-arf sínn Cam-nes land miðle Haukadals-ár, ok hryggjar <anchor id=a82.14>þess es gengr or fialle ofan í sió: Hrútr bió á Hrútz-st&aolig;ðom; <anchor id=a82.15>hann átte Hallveigo, dóttor Þórgríms or Þyckva-skóge, systor Ar<hi>n</hi>&shy;móðs<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a82.16>ens Gamla; þau &aoacute;tto m&aolig;rg b&aolig;rn; þeirra son vas Þórhallr, <anchor id=a82.17>faðer Halldóro, móðor Goðlaugs, f&aolig;ðor Þórdísar, móðor Þórðar <anchor id=a82.18><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Sturlo í Hvamme<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>: Grímr vas sonr Hrútz, ok Márr<note place=apparatus id=an82.3><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Ma<hi rend=sc>r</hi>, S.</note>, Endriðe, <anchor id=a82.19>ok Steinn, Þórliótr, ok I&aolig;rundr, Þorkell, Steingrímr, Þórbergr, <anchor id=a82.20>Atle, Arnórr, Márr, Carr, Cugallde: en dæt<hi>t</hi>r, Bergþóra, Steinunn,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a82.21>Riúpa, Finna, Ástríðr.

<p n=15.11><anchor id=a82.22><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Auðr gaf dótter Þórsteins Rauðs, Þórhilde, Eysteine Mein-fret, <anchor id=a82.23>syne Alfs or Osto: þeirra son vas Þórðr, faðer Kolbeins, <anchor id=a83.1><pb id=pb83 n=83><note place=margin>[115: ii. 19.]</note>f&aolig;ðor Þórðar Skallz: ok Alfr í D&aolig;lom; hann átte Halldíse, dóttor <anchor id=a83.2>Erps; þeirra son vas Snorre, faðer Þórgils H&aolig;llo sonar: Dæt<hi>t</hi>r Alfs í <anchor id=a83.3>D&aolig;lom vóro þær Þórgerðr, es átte Are Mars son; ok Þórelfr, es átte <anchor id=a83.4>Havarr, son Einars, Cleps sonar; þeirra son Þórgeirr: Þórolfr Refr vas <anchor id=a83.5>ok son Eysteins, es fell á Þingnes-þinge or liðe Þórðar<note place=apparatus id=an83.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Emend.; Þorsnes-þ., S.</note> Gelliss, þá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a83.6>es þeir Tungo-Oddr b&aolig;rðosk; Hrappr hét enn fiórðe Eysteins son.

<p n=15.12><anchor id=a83.7><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Auðr gaf Osc, dóttor Þórsteins, Hallsteine Goða; þeirra <anchor id=a83.8>son vas Þorsteinn Surtr.

<p n=15.13><anchor id=a83.9><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Vígdíse Þórsteins dóttor gaf Auðr Campa-Gríme; þeirra <anchor id=a83.10>dótter Arnbi&aolig;rg, es Ásolfr Flose átte í H&aolig;fða; þeirra b&aolig;rn Oddr,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a83.11>ok Vígdís, es átte Þorgeirr Caðals son.

<p n=15.14><anchor id=a83.12><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Auðr f&oeacute;dde Óleif Feilan, son Þorsteins Rauðs. Hann <anchor id=a83.13>feck Aldísar<note place=apparatus id=an83.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> See v. 13. 1, Asdisar, S.</note> ennar Barreysko, dóttor Conals, Steinmóðs sonar, <anchor id=a83.14>Olves sonar Barna-karls. Sonr Conals vas Steinmóðr, faðer Hall-dóro, <anchor id=a83.15>es átte Eilífr, son Ketils Einhenda.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a83.16>Þeirra b&aolig;rn, Þórðr Geller [es átte Hroðnýjo dóttor Miðfiarðar-Skeggja. <anchor id=a83.17>Þeirra syner vóro, Eyjolfr (enn) Grae, Þórarenn Fyls-enne, <anchor id=a83.18>Þórkell Cugge. <hi>Eyjolfr enn Grae átte ... Þeirra syner Þórkell <anchor id=a83.19>ok Bolverkr.... <anchor id=a84.1><pb id=pb84 n=84><note place=margin>[117: ii. 19]</note>Þórarenn Fylsenne átte Fríðgerðe, dóttor Þórðar frá Hofða; <anchor id=a84.2>þeirra son Skegge ok dótter Vígdís, es Hrafn Hlymreks-fare átte ....: <anchor id=a84.3>Þorkell Cugge átte Þórríðe, dóttor Ásgeirs æðe-collz, þeirra son <anchor id=a84.4>Þorsteinn.</hi> Dótter Óleifs Feilans vas]<note place=apparatus id=an84.1><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es átte ... Feilans vas]</ab> <foreign lang=en-UK>supplied from Laxdæla Saga; for here the scribe of S must have skipped a whole paragraph, containing a set of pedigrees; the bits in italics are filled in from other sources.</foreign></note> Þóra, móðer Þórgríms, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a84.5>Snorra Goða; hon vas ok móðer Barkar ens Digra, ok Mars,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a84.6>Hallvarðz sonar<corr resp=errata> Ingialdr ok Grane voro syner Óleifs Feilans</corr>: Vígdís hét (&aolig;nnor) dótter Óleifs Feilans ....<note place=apparatus id=an84.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Blank in S.</note>: <anchor id=a84.7>Helga hét en þriðja dótter Óleifs; hána átte Gunnarr Hlífar son; <anchor id=a84.8>þeirra dótter Iófríðr, es Þóroddr Tungo-Oddz son átte, en síðarr <anchor id=a84.9>Þorsteinn Egils son; Þórunn vas &aolig;nnor dótter Gunnars es Hersteinn <anchor id=a84.10>Blund-Cetils son átte; Rauðr ok Hau<hi rend=sc>g</hi>ud&apos; vóro syner Gunnars:<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a84.11>Þórríðr<note place=apparatus id=an84.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórríðr]</ab> Þórdis, Laxd. Saga, ch. 12.</note> hét en fiórða dótter Óleifs Feilans; hána átte Þórarenn <anchor id=a84.12>Raga-bróðer; þeirra dótter vas Vígdís, es Steinn Þórarins son átte <anchor id=a84.13>at Rauða-mel.

<p n=15.15><anchor id=a84.14><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Auðr vas vegs-kona mikil. Þá es hon vas elle-móð, bauð <anchor id=a84.15>hon til sín frændom sínom ok m&aoacute;gom, ok bió dýrliga veizlo. En<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a84.16>es þriár nætr hafðe veizlan staðet, þá valðe hon giafar vinom sínom, <anchor id=a84.17>ok réð þeim heilræðe. Sagðe hon, at þá skyllde standa veizlan <anchor id=a84.18>enn þriár nætr; hon kvað þat vesa skyldo erbe sítt. Þá nótt efter <anchor id=a84.19>andaðesk hon, ok vas grafen í fl&oeacute;ðar-mále, sem hon hafðe fyrer <anchor id=a85.1><pb id=pb85 n=85><note place=margin>[117: ii. 19.]</note>sagt; þvi at hon vilde eige liggja í óvígðre moldo, es hon vas <anchor id=a85.2>skírð.&mdash;Efter þat spilltesk trua frænda hennar.


<p n=16.1><anchor id=a85.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1.</ab> Ceallacr hét maðr, son Biarnar ens Sterka, bróðer <anchor id=a85.4>Giaflaugar, es átte Bi&aolig;rn enn Austr&oeacute;ne. Hann fór <anchor id=a85.5>til Íslannz, ok nam land frá D&aolig;gurðar-&aoacute; til Klofninga; ok bió á<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a85.6>Ceallacs-st&aolig;ðom; hans syner vóro<note place=apparatus id=an85.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>syner vóro]</ab> son var, S (s. v&rcomb;. for ss. v&ocomb;).</note> Helge Hrogn; ok Þórgrímr <anchor id=a85.7>Þaungull under Felle; Eilífr Prude; Ásbi&aolig;rn Vodve á Ara-st&aolig;ðom<note place=apparatus id=an85.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> O<hi rend=sc>r</hi>astoðum, S (badly); see Sturl. vii. ch. 330.</note>; <anchor id=a85.8>Bi&aolig;rn Hvalmage í Túngarðe; Þorsteinn þynning; Gizurr Glade <anchor id=a85.9>í Skora-vík; Þorbi&aolig;rn Skrofuðr á Cetils st&aolig;ðom; (<hi>en dótter</hi>) Æsa <anchor id=a85.10>í Svíney, móðer Eyjolfs ok Tinforna.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=16.2><anchor id=a85.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Liótolfr hét leysingi Ceallacs<note place=apparatus id=an85.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>leysingi Ceallacs]</ab> thus, Cirialaci libertus, Spec. (H&ast;) maðr, S.</note>; hónom gaf Ceallacr bústað <anchor id=a85.12>á Liótolfs-st&aolig;ðom inn frá Kalda-kinn<note place=apparatus id=an85.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> Kadda <hi rend=sc>k</hi>i<hi rend=sc>n</hi>, S.</note>. Hans syner vóro (þeir) <anchor id=a85.13>Þorsteinn, ok Biorn, ok Hrafse&mdash;hann vas Risa ættar at móðerne. <anchor id=a85.14>Liótolfr vas iarn-smiðr. Þeir réðosk út í Fellz-skóga á Liótolfs-staðe; <anchor id=a85.15>ok Vífill vin þeirra<note place=apparatus id=an85.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Vífill vin þ.]</ab> M&ast;; V. var v. þeirra, S.</note> es bió á Vífils-toftom. Þórunn at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a85.16>Þórunnar-toftom vas móðer Oddmars ok fóstra Ceallacs, sonar <anchor id=a85.17>Biarnar Hvalmaga. Álof dótter Þórgríms under Felle tók &oeacute;rsl. <anchor id=a85.18>Þat kendo menn <hi>H</hi>rafsa; en hann tók Oddmar hiá hvílo hennar, <anchor id=a85.19>ok sagðe hann sig valda: þá gaf Þorgrímr hónum Deildar-ey<note place=apparatus id=an85.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá gaf ... ey]</ab> entered in a wrong place.</note>: <anchor id=a85.20>Hrafse kvazk mundo h&oelig;ggva Oddmar á henni<note place=apparatus id=an85.7><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>henni]</ab> emend.; birne, S.</note>, eðr<note place=apparatus id=an85.8><ab type=textRef>eðr]</ab> áðr?</note> hann b&oelig;tte<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a86.1><pb id=pb86 n=86><note place=margin>[118: ii. 19.]</note>fyrer eyna<note place=apparatus id=an86.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eyna]</ab> emend.; hann, S.</note>. Eige vilde Ceallacr láta eyna. Hrafse tók skip<note place=apparatus id=an86.2><ab type=textRef>skip]</ab> emend.; fe, S.</note> þeirra <anchor id=a86.2>or torf-nauste. Ceallacs syner fóro efter ok n&aoacute;ðo eige: efter þat <anchor id=a86.3>sótto þeir Eilífr Hrafsa<note place=apparatus id=an86.3><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sótto ... Hrafsa]</ab> emend.; stuckn þeir Eilifr ok Hrafsi, S.</note> í eyna. &dagger;Or kom i þanen Eilíjfs i Gras ok <anchor id=a86.4>hamaðest hann&dagger;. Bi&aolig;rn Hvalmage vá Bi&aolig;rn Liótolfs son<note place=apparatus id=an86.4><ab type=textRef>Or kom ... Liótolfs son]</ab> add. M&ast; (from H&ast;, though corrupt); read, Hr(afsi) kom í gegn Eilífi pruda, ok...?</note> at leik. <anchor id=a86.5>Þeir Liótolfr keypto at Oddmare, at hann k&oelig;me Bírne í f&oeacute;re Ceallacs<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a86.6>syne<note place=apparatus id=an86.5><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ceallacs syne]</ab> add. M&ast; (H&ast;).</note>. Ceallacr unge rann efter hónom. Eige varð hann sóttr <anchor id=a86.7>áðr þeir tóko sveinenn. Ceallac vógo þeir á Ceallacs-hóle; hann <anchor id=a86.8>vas þá vii vetra<note place=apparatus id=an86.6><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann vas þá vii vetra]</ab> add. M&ast; (H&ast;).</note>. Efter þat sótto Ceallacs syner Liótolb ok Þorstein <anchor id=a86.9>í iarð-hús í Fellz-skógom, ok fann Eilífr annan munna; geck hann <anchor id=a86.10>á bak þeim, ok vá þá báða. Hrafse geck inn á Ara-st&aolig;ðom,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a86.11>es Ceallacr sat við elld at heim-boðe. Hrafse vas í kven-klæðum; <anchor id=a86.12>hann hió til Ceallacs, en hann kastaðe yfer sik skilde sínom, ok <anchor id=a86.13>geck sundr hand-leggr hans; en varð eige sárr. Hrafse geck um <anchor id=a86.14>dyrr þær es á veggnom vóro, ok vá Ásbi&aolig;rn; ok komzk hann <anchor id=a86.15>síðan braut. Ceallacs syner keypto at Þórðe Vívils syne, at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a86.16>koma Hrafsa í f&aeacute;re við þá. Hann sagðe Hrafsa, at oxe hans <anchor id=a86.17>læge í keldo; Þórðr bar ski&aolig;ld hans; ok es hann sá Ceallacs-sono, <anchor id=a87.1><pb id=pb87 n=87><note place=margin>[120: ii. 19.]</note>kastaðe hann skildenom til þeirra. Hrafse greip Þórð, ok <anchor id=a87.2>kastaðe hónom ofan fyr kleifena, ok varð þat bane hans. Eige <anchor id=a87.3>g&aoacute;to Ceallacs syner sótt hann, fyr an þeir felldo at hónom viðo. <anchor id=a87.4>Eilífr sat hiá meðan þeir sótto hann<note place=apparatus id=an87.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hrafse geck inn ... sótto hann]</ab> according to H&ast; (M&ast;). Much shorter and dilapidated in S&mdash;Hrafse gekk inn á Arastauðum at boðe, hann var í kvenn fötum. Kiallakr sat á palle með skiolld<note n=1 id=n87.1 lang="en-UK">First written <hi lang=is>felld</hi>, and since underlined.</note>. Hrafse hió hann Asbiorn bana haugg ok gekk út um ve<hi rend=sc>g</hi>. Þórðr Vifelsson sagðe Hrafsa at yxin (!) hans lægi í keldu; hann bar skiold huns. Hrafse fleygðe honum fyrir kleif er hann sá Kiallaks sonu; eigi gátu þeir hann (<hi>sic</hi>) áðr þeir feldu vidu at honum. Eilífr sat hiá er þeir hann (!).</note>.


<p n=17.1><anchor id=a87.5><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an87.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Here H resumes the text.</note><hi rend=sc>Hiorleifr horða-konungr</hi>, es kallaðr vas<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a87.6>enn Kven-same; hann átte Æso ena Lióso; þeirra <anchor id=a87.7>son vas Útryggr, faðer Úblauðs, f&aolig;ðor H&aolig;gna ens Hvíta, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a87.8>Ulfs ens Skiálga. Annarr son Hi&aolig;rleifs vas Hálfr konungr es réð <anchor id=a87.9>Hálfs-reckom<note place=apparatus id=an87.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Alfs-reckom, S.</note>; hans móðer vas Hildr en Mióva, dótter H&aolig;gna í <anchor id=a87.10>Niarðey. Hálfr konungr vas faðer Hi&aolig;rs konongs, es hefnde<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a87.11>f&aolig;ðor síns með Solva H&aolig;gna-syne.

<p n=17.2><anchor id=a87.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hi&aolig;rr konungr herjaðe á Biarma-land; hann tók þar at herfange <anchor id=a87.13>Liuvinu<note place=apparatus id=an87.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Liufvinu, S.</note>, dóttor Biarma-konungs. Hon vas efter á Roga-lande <anchor id=a87.14>þá es Hi&aolig;rr konungr fór í hernað. Þá ól hon sono tvá; <anchor id=a87.15>hét annarr Geir-mundr, en annarr Há-mundr; þeir vóro svarter<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a87.16>miok. Þá ól ambótt hennar son, sá hét Leifr son Loðhattar þræls. <anchor id=a87.17>Leifr vas hvítr: því skifte dróttning sveinom við ambóttena, ok <anchor id=a87.18>eignaðe ser Leif. En es konungr kom heim, vas hann ílla við <anchor id=a87.19>Leif, ok kvað hann vesa smá-mannligan. Nest es konungr fór í <anchor id=a87.20>víking, bauð dróttning heim Braga skálde, ok bað hann skynja<note place=apparatus id=an87.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>skynja]</ab> S; skoða, Cd.</note><ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a88.1><pb id=pb88 n=88><note place=margin>[121: ii. 19.]</note>um sveinana&mdash;þá vóro þeir þre-vetrer; hon byrgðe þá í stofo hiá <anchor id=a88.2>Braga, en fal sik í pallenom. Brage kvað þetta:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a88.3>Tveir &apos;ro inne, true ek b&aoacute;ðom vel,
    <l><anchor id=a88.4>Hámundr ok Geirmundr Hi&oogon;rvi borner:
    <l><anchor id=a88.5>En Leifr þriðe Loðhattar son;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a88.6>F&aolig;dde þýr þann; manat þræll in verre!<note place=apparatus id=an88.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>F&aolig;dde þýr ... verre]</ab> emend.; fæðat þu þann kona, faer munu verri, S; fæd þu kona feord<hi rend=sup>r</hi> man hann verri, H.</note>
</lg>

<p n=17.2.1><anchor id=a88.7>Hann laust sprota á pallenn þann es dróttning vas í. Þá <hi>es</hi><note place=apparatus id=an88.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þann es]</ab> þann, S; þar, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a88.8>konungr kom heim, sagðe hón hónom þetta, ok sýnde hónom <anchor id=a88.9>sono sína<note place=apparatus id=an88.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sono sina]</ab> sveinana, S.</note>. Hann kvazk eige slík Heljar-skinn séð hafa&mdash;þeir vóro <anchor id=a88.10>svá kallaðer síðan báðer br&oeacute;ðr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=17.3><anchor id=a88.11><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Geirmundr Heljar-skinn vas her-konungr. Hann herjaðe í <anchor id=a88.12>vestr-víking, en átte ríke á Roga-lande. En es hann kom or <anchor id=a88.13>hernaðe es hann hafðe lenge braut vereð, þá hafðe Haraldr konungr <anchor id=a88.14>Hárfagre barizk í Hafr<hi>s</hi>-firðe við Eirek H&aolig;rða-konung, ok <anchor id=a88.15>Sulka konung af Roga-lande, ok Ceotva-enn-Auðga, ok fenget<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a88.16>sigr. Hann hafðe þá lagt under sik allt Roga-land, ok reket þar <anchor id=a88.17>marga menn af &oeacute;ðlom sínom. Sá þá Geirmundr einge sínn kost <anchor id=a88.18>at fá þar s&oeacute;mðer. Hann tók þá þat ráð, at fara at leita Íslannz. <anchor id=a88.19>Til ferðar rézk með hónom Ulfr enn Skiálge frænde hans; ok <anchor id=a88.20>Steinolfr enn Láge, son Hrólfs Hersiss af Ogðom, ok Ondóttar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a88.21>systor Olvess Barna-karls.

<p><anchor id=a88.22>Þeir Geirmundr hofðo<note place=apparatus id=an88.4><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þeir G. hofðo]</ab> S; Þeir Þrondr miobeinn þeir hofðu, Cd.</note> sam-flot, ok stýrðe síno skipe hverr þeirra. <anchor id=a89.1><pb id=pb89 n=89><note place=margin>[123: ii. 19.]</note>Þeir tóko Breiða-fi&aolig;rð, ok l&aoacute;go við Elliða-ey. Þá spurðo þeir, at <anchor id=a89.2>fi&aolig;rðrenn vas bygðr et syðra, en lítt eða ecki et vestra. Geirmundr <anchor id=a89.3>hélt inn at Meðal-fellz-str&aolig;nd, ok nam land frá Fábeins-&aoacute; <anchor id=a89.4>til Klofa-steina<note place=apparatus id=an89.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Klofsteina, S.</note>. Hann lende í Geirmundar-vág<hi>e</hi>, ok vas enn fyrsta <anchor id=a89.5>vetr í Búðar-dale. Steinolfr nam land inn frá Klofa-steinom, en<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a89.6>Ulfr fyr vestan fi&aolig;rð,&mdash;sem enn mun sagt verða. Geirmunde <anchor id=a89.7>þótte land-nám sítt lítið, es hann hafðe rausnar-bú ok fi&aolig;lmennt, <anchor id=a89.8>svá at hann hafðe átta tige frelsingja. Hann bió á Geirmundar-st&aolig;ðom <anchor id=a89.9>under Skarðe.<note place=apparatus id=an89.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Geirmunde ... Skarðe]</ab> add. S.</note>

<p n=17.4><anchor id=a89.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Maðr hét Þróndr Mió-beinn; hann for til Íslannz með Geirmunde<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a89.11>Heljar-skinne; hann vas ættaðr af Ogðom.<note place=apparatus id=an89.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Maðr hét Þróndr ... Ogðom]</ab> add. S.</note> Þróndr nam <anchor id=a89.12>eyjar fyr vestan Biarneyja-floa, ok bió í Flatey. Hann átte dóttor <anchor id=a89.13>Gils Skeiðar-nefs: þeirra son vas Hergils Hnapp-raz<note place=apparatus id=an89.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Napp-, Cd.</note> es bió í <anchor id=a89.14>Hergils-ey. Dótter Hergils vas Þórkatla, es átte Marr á Reykja-hólom. <anchor id=a89.15>Hergils átte Þór&aolig;rno, dóttor Ketils Ilbreiðs. Ingialldr<note place=apparatus id=an89.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ingialldr]</ab> Ingiallz s. var s., Cd.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a89.16>vas son þeirra, es bió í Hergils-ey ok veitte Gísla Súrs syne; fyrer <anchor id=a89.17>þat g&oelig;rðe B&aolig;rkr enn Digre af hónom eyjarnar; en hann keypte <anchor id=a89.18>Hlíð í Þorska-firðe. Hans son vas Þórarenn, es átte Þórgerðe, <anchor id=a89.19>dóttor Glúms Geira sonar; ok vas þeirra son Helgo-Steinarr. <anchor id=a89.20>Þórarenn vas með Ceartan í Svína-dale þá es hann fell.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=17.5><anchor id=a89.21><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þá bió Þróndr Mió-beinn í Flatey, es þeir Oddr Skraute ok <anchor id=a90.1><pb id=pb90 n=90><note place=margin>[124: ii. 20.]</note>Þórer son hans kómo út. Þeir n&aoacute;mo land í Þorska-firðe. Bió Oddr <anchor id=a90.2>í Skógom; en Þórer fór útan, ok vas í hernaðe. Hann feck goll <anchor id=a90.3>mikit á Finn-m&aolig;rk. Með hónom vas sonr<note place=apparatus id=an90.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas sonr]</ab> vóro syner, S.</note> Hallz af Hof-st&aolig;ðom. <anchor id=a90.4>En es þeir kómo til Íslannz, kallaðe Hallr til gollzens; ok urðo <anchor id=a90.5>þar um deilor miklar.&mdash;Af því g&oelig;r<hi>ð</hi>esk Þorskfirðinga Saga. Goll-Þórer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a90.6>bió á Þóris-st&aolig;ðom ok vas et mesta afar-menne<note place=apparatus id=an90.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok v. et m. afar-m.]</ab> add. S.</note>: hann átte <anchor id=a90.7>Ingibi&aolig;rgo dóttor Gils Skeiðar-nefs. Þeirra son (vas) Guðmundr<note place=apparatus id=an90.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Guðmundr]</ab> S; Sigmundr, Cd.</note>.

<p n=17.6><anchor id=a90.8><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Geirmundr fór vestr á Strander, ok nam land frá Ryta-gnúp <anchor id=a90.9>vestan til Horns; en þaðan austr til Straum-ness. Þar g&oelig;rðe <anchor id=a90.10>hann fiogor bú: eitt í Aðal-vík; þat varð-veitte ármaðr hans:<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a90.11>annat í Cearans-vík; þat varð-veitte Cearan þræll hans: þriðja á <anchor id=a90.12>Almenningom enom Vestrom; þat varð-veitte Bi&aolig;rn þræll hans <anchor id=a90.13>es sekr varð um sauða-t&aolig;ko þá es Geirmundr vas allr. Hans <anchor id=a90.14>sekðar-fé urðo almenningar: fiórða bú átte Geirmundr í Barz-vík; <anchor id=a90.15>þat varð-veitte Atle þræll hans, ok hafðe hann tolf<note place=apparatus id=an90.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tolf]</ab> xii, Cd.; xiiii, S.</note> þræla<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a90.16>under ser. En es Geirmundr fór á meðal bua sínna, þá hafðe <anchor id=a90.17>hann iamnan átta tige manna. Hann vas stór-auðigr at lausa-fé, <anchor id=a90.18>ok hafðe of kvik-feár. Svá segja menn, at svín hans genge á <anchor id=a90.19>Svína-nese; en sauðer á Hiarðar-nese; en hann hafðe sel-f&aolig;r í <anchor id=a90.20>Bitro. Sumer segja, at hann hafe ok bú átt í Selár-dale á Geirmundar-st&aolig;ðom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a90.21>í Steingríms-firðe. Þat segja vitrer menn, at <anchor id=a91.1><pb id=pb91 n=91><note place=margin>[126: ii. 21.]</note>hann hafe g&aolig;fgastr veret allra land-náms-manna á Íslande. En lítt <anchor id=a91.2>átte hann her deilor við menn, þvi at hann kom heldr gamall út. <anchor id=a91.3>Þeir Ceallacr deilðo um land þat es vas meðal Klofninga ok <anchor id=a91.4>Fábeins-ár, ok b&aolig;rðosk á ekronom fyr útan Klofninga. Þar vildo <anchor id=a91.5>hvárer-tveggjo sá<note place=apparatus id=an91.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sá]</ab> þar, add. Cd.</note>. Veitte Geirmunde betr. Þeir Bi&aolig;rn enn Aust&shy;r&oeacute;ne<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a91.6>ok Vestarr af Eyre sætto þá. Þá lende Vestarr í Vestars-nese, <anchor id=a91.7>es hann fór til fundarens.

<p><anchor id=a91.8>Geirmundr fal fé mikit í Andar-keldo under Skarðe. Hann <anchor id=a91.9>átte Herríðe dóttor Gautz Gautreks sonar ens Orva; þeirra dótter <anchor id=a91.10>Ýr, es átte Cetill; þeirra son Þórhallr, ok Odde, faðer Hallvarar, es<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a91.11>átte B&aolig;rkr Þormotz (son) Þióstars sonar. Síðan átte hann Þórk&aolig;tlo <anchor id=a91.12>dóttor Ófeigs Þorolfs sonar, þeirra b&aolig;rn Geirríðr ok ...<note place=apparatus id=an91.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Síðan átte hann ... Geirríðr ok (blank)]</ab> add. S.</note> Geirmundr <anchor id=a91.13>andaðesk á Geirmundar-st&aolig;ðom, ok vas hann lagðr í skip <anchor id=a91.14>í skógenn þar út frá garðe<note place=apparatus id=an91.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lagðr ... garðe]</ab> S; heygðr í skipe þar út frá garde, Cd.</note>. Geirmundr gaf Hrolfe Ceallacs syne, <anchor id=a91.15>vin sínom, bústað at Ballar-&aoacute;: hans son vas Illoge enn Rauðe;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a91.16>ok Solve, faðer Þórðar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Magnuss, f. Solva, f. Pals prestz í <anchor id=a91.17>Reykjaholte<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.


<p n=18.1><anchor id=a91.18><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 1.</ab> STEINOLFR enn LÁGE, son Hrólfs hersiss af Ogðom, <anchor id=a91.19>nam land inn frá Klofa-steinom til Griót-vallar-múla, <anchor id=a91.20>ok bió í Fagra-dale á Steinolfs-hialla. Hann geck þar inn<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a91.21>á fiallet; hann sá þar fyr innan dal mikinn ok vaxinn allan viðe; <anchor id=a91.22>hann sá eitt rióðr í dale þeim; þar lét hann b&oeacute; g&oelig;ra ok kallaðe <anchor id=a92.1><pb id=pb92 n=92><note place=margin>[126: ii. 21.]</note>Saur-b&oeacute;; þvi at þar vas mýr-lent miok; ok svá kallaðe hann allan <anchor id=a92.2>dalenn&mdash;þat heiter nú Torf-nes es b&oeacute;renn vas g&oelig;rr. Steinolfr <anchor id=a92.3>átte Eirnyju<note place=apparatus id=an92.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Ernyju, S.</note>, Þiðranda dóttor; Þórsteinn boande vas son þeirra; <anchor id=a92.4>en Arndís en Auðga vas dótter þeirra, móðer Þórðar, f&aolig;ðor Þórgerðar, <anchor id=a92.5>es Oddr átte. Þeirra son vas Hrafn Hlymreks-fare, es átte<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a92.6>Vígdíse dóttor Þórarens Fyls-ennis. Þeirra son vas Sn&aolig;rtr, faðer <anchor id=a92.7>Iódísar, es átte Eyiolfr Hallbiarnar son; þeirra dótter Halla, es <anchor id=a92.8>átte Atle Tanna son <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>þeirra dótter Yngvilldr es átte Snorre Húnboga <anchor id=a92.9>son<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an92.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeirra d. Halla ... Húnboga s.]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=18.1.1><anchor id=a92.10>Steinolfe hurfo svín þriú: þau fundosk tveimr<note place=apparatus id=an92.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tveimr]</ab> ij, Cd.</note> vettrom síðarr í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a92.11>Svína-dale, ok vóro þá þrír teger saman.

<p n=18.1.2><anchor id=a92.12>Steinolfr nam ok Steinolfs-dal í Króks-firðe.

<p n=18.2><anchor id=a92.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Sleito-Bi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an92.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Rather than Sletto-?</note> hét maðr, hann átte Þórriðe dóttor Steinolfs ens <anchor id=a92.14>Lága. Hann nam land með ráðe Steinolfs enn vestra dal í <anchor id=a92.15>Saur-b&oeacute;; hann bió á Sleitu-Biarnar-st&aolig;ðom upp frá Þverfelle.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a92.16>Hans son Þióðrekr, es átte Arngerðe, dóttor Þórbiarnar, Skialda-Biarnar <anchor id=a92.17>sonar; þeirra son vas Víga-Sturla, es b&oeacute;enn reiste at<note place=apparatus id=an92.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> aa, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a92.18>Staðar-hóle: ok Cn&aolig;ttr, faðer Ásgeirs: ok Þórbi&aolig;rn; ok Þióðrekr, <anchor id=a92.19>es borgen es við kend á Colla-fiarðar-heiðe. Þióðreke Sleito-Biarnar <anchor id=a92.20>syne þótte of þr&oelig;ng-lent í Saurb&oeacute;; því rézk hann til Ísa-fiardar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a92.21>Þar g&oelig;risk<note place=apparatus id=an92.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> geriz, Cd.; g&oelig;rdiz, S.</note> saga þeirra Þórbiarnar ok Hávarðar ens Halta.

<pb id=pb93 n=93><note place=margin>[128: ii. 22.]</note>

<p n=18.3><anchor id=a93.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Óláfr Belgr, es Ormr enn Mióve rak braut or Óláfs-vík, nam <anchor id=a93.2>Belgs-dal, ok bió á Belgs-st&aolig;ðom áðr þeir Þióðrekr r&aoacute;ko hann <anchor id=a93.3>braut. Síðan nam hann inn frá Griótvallar-múla, ok bió í Óláfs-dale. <anchor id=a93.4>Hans son vas Þórvaldr, sá es sauða-t&aolig;ko s&aolig;k selðe á hendr <anchor id=a93.5>Þórarne Giallanda Ogmunde Volo-Steins syne. Fyrer þat vá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a93.6>hann Ogmund á Þorskafiarðar-þinge.

<p n=18.4><anchor id=a93.7><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Gils Skeiðar-nef nam Gils-fi&aolig;rð miðle Óláfsdals ok Króks-fiarðar-múla; <anchor id=a93.8>hann bió at Kleifom. Hans son vas Heðinn, faðer <anchor id=a93.9>Halldórs Garpsdals-goða, f&aolig;ðor Þórvallz í Garpsdal, es átte Goð&shy;rúno <anchor id=a93.10>Osvifrs<note place=apparatus id=an93.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Osvifs, S.</note> dóttor.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=18.5><anchor id=a93.11><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórarenn Krókr nam Króks-fi&aolig;rð til Hafra-fellz, frá Króks-fiarðar-nese. <anchor id=a93.12>Hann deilðe um Steinolfs-dal við Steinolf enn Lága; <anchor id=a93.13>ok r&oelig;re efter þeim við tottogo<note place=apparatus id=an93.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tottogo]</ab> x, S.</note> menn, es hann fór or sele með <anchor id=a93.14>siaunda mann. Þeir b&aolig;rðosk við Fagradals-ár-ós á eyronom.<note place=apparatus id=an93.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> eyrinne, S.</note> Þá <anchor id=a93.15>kvómo menn til frá húse at hialpa Steinolfe.  Þar fell Þórarenn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a93.16>Krókr ok þeir fiórer, en siau menn af Steinolfe: par ero kum<hi>b</hi>l <anchor id=a93.17>þeirra.

<p n=18.6><anchor id=a93.18><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Ketill Ilbreiðr nam Bero-fi&aolig;rð, son Þórbiarnar Talkna; hans <anchor id=a93.19>dótter vas Þórarna es átte Hergils Hnappraz: sem fyrr es ritið.

<p n=18.7><anchor id=a93.20><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> [S: Þróndr Mió-beinn átte dóttor Gils Skeiðar-nefs: þeirra<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a93.21>dótter vas Þórarna, er átte Hrólfr, son Helga ens Magra: Þórbi&aolig;rg <anchor id=a94.1><pb id=pb94 n=94><note place=margin>[129: ii. 22.]</note>Knarrar-bringa vas &aolig;nnor dótter Gils Skeiðar-nefs. Herfiðr hét <anchor id=a94.2>son hans, es bió í Króksfirðe.]<note place=apparatus id=an94.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> This paragraph added from S.</note>


<p n=19.1><anchor id=a94.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>19.</hi> 1.</ab> Ulfr enn Skiálge, son H&aolig;gna ens Hvíta, nam <anchor id=a94.4>Reykja-nes allt miðle Þorskafiarðar ok Hafra-fellz. <anchor id=a94.5>Hann átte Bi&aolig;rgo, dóttor Eyvindar Aust-mannz, systor Helga (ens)<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a94.6>Magra. Þeirra son vas Atle enn Rauðe, es átte Þórbi&aolig;rgo, systor <anchor id=a94.7>Steinolfs ens Lága. Þeirra son vas Márr á Hólom, es átte Þór&shy;k&aolig;tlo, <anchor id=a94.8>dóttor Hergils <hi>H</hi>nappraz. Þeirra son vas Are.

<p n=19.2><anchor id=a94.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann varð sæ-hafe<note place=apparatus id=an94.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sæ-hafe]</ab> S; sæfare, Cd.</note> til Hvítra-manna-lannz&mdash;þat kalla sumer <anchor id=a94.10>Írland et Mykla: þat liggr vestr í haf ner Vínlande<note place=apparatus id=an94.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Vínlande]</ab> Vindlande, Cd.</note> eno Góða:&mdash;þat<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a94.11>es kallat sex d&oeacute;gra sigleng vestr frá Írlande.&mdash;Þaðan náðe <anchor id=a94.12>eige Are braut at fara, ok vas þar skírðr. Frá þesso sagðe fyrst<note place=apparatus id=an94.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> þessa sogo sagðe fyrst, S.</note> <anchor id=a94.13>Hrafn Hlymreks-fare, es lenge hafðe veret í Hlymreka á Írlande. <anchor id=a94.14>Svá kvað Þorkell Gellis-son<note place=apparatus id=an94.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gellis-son]</ab> S; Geitis-s., Cd. (badly).</note> segja Íslenzka menn, þá es heyrt <anchor id=a94.15>h&aolig;fðo frá segja<note place=apparatus id=an94.6><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>frá segja]</ab> add. S.</note> Þórfinn iarl í Orkneyjom, at Are hefðe kendr veret<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a94.16>á Hvítramanna-lande, ok næðe<note place=apparatus id=an94.7><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> néðe, S.</note> eige braut at fara; en vas þar vel <anchor id=a94.17>virðr.

<p n=19.3><anchor id=a94.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Are átte Þórgerðe dóttor Alfs í<note place=apparatus id=an94.8><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>í]</ab> or, S.</note> D&aolig;lom. Þeirra son vas <anchor id=a94.19>Þórgils, ok Goðleifr, ok Illoge&mdash;þat es Reyknesinga-kyn.

<p n=19.4><anchor id=a94.20><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> [S: Iorundr hét son Ulfs ens Skiálga; hann átte Þorbi&aolig;rgo<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a95.1><pb id=pb95 n=95><note place=margin>[130: ii. 23.]</note>Knar<hi>r</hi>ar-bringo; þeirra dótter vas Þióðhildr es átte Eirikr Rauðe. <anchor id=a95.2>Þeirra son Leifr enn Heppne á Gr&oelig;n<hi>a</hi>-lande.]

<p n=19.5><anchor id=a95.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> [S: I&aolig;rundr hét son Atla ens Rauða; hann átte Þórdíse <anchor id=a95.4>dóttor Þórgeirs Suðo; þeirra dótter vas Oddkatla es átte Þórgils <anchor id=a95.5>Collz son. I&aolig;rundr vas ok faðer Snorra.]<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<p n=20.1><anchor id=a95.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>20.</hi> 1.</ab> Hallsteinn, son Þórolfs Mostrar-skeggs, nam <anchor id=a95.7>Þorskafiarðar-str&aolig;nd<note place=apparatus id=an95.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Þorskafiord, S.</note>; ok bió á Hallsteins-nese. <anchor id=a95.8>Hann blótaðe Þór til þess at hann sende hónom &aolig;ndoges-súlor; <anchor id=a95.9>ok gaf þar til son sínn. Efter þat kom tré á land hans; þat <anchor id=a95.10>vas lx<note place=apparatus id=an95.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lx]</ab> lxiii, Cd.</note> alna langt, ok tveggja faðma digrt. Þat vas haft til &aolig;ndoges-súlna,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a95.11>ok vóro þar af g&oelig;rvar &aolig;ndoges-súlor nær á hverjom b&oeacute; um <anchor id=a95.12>þver-fi&aolig;rðo.&mdash;Þar heiter nú Grene-trés-nes, es tréið kom á land.

<p n=20.1.1><anchor id=a95.13>Hallsteinn hafðe herjat á Skotland, ok tók þar þá þræla es hann <anchor id=a95.14>hafðe út. Þá sende hann till salt-g&oelig;rðar í Svefn-eyjar. &dagger;Þar h&aolig;fðo <anchor id=a95.15>þeir Hallsteins þrælar hagfarm.&dagger;<note place=apparatus id=an95.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þá sende ... hagfarm]</ab> H omits this clause; it is corrupt, and can only partly be mended&mdash;&lsquo;Þar haufdu Þr. Hallsteins hæla hagfarm,&rsquo; S.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=20.1.2><anchor id=a95.16>Hallsteinn átte Oscu dóttor Þorsteins Rauðs. Þeirra son vas <anchor id=a95.17>Þórsteinn es fann sumar-auka. Þorsteinn Surtr átte ... Þeirra son <anchor id=a95.18>vas Þórarenn, en dótter Þórdís, es átte Þórkell Trefill; ok Osc es <anchor id=a95.19>átte Steinn Miok-siglande; Þórsteinn Hvíte hét son þeirra. Sámr <anchor id=a96.1><pb id=pb96 n=96><note place=margin>[132: ii. 24.]</note>hét son Þorsteins Surtz óskil-getenn; hann deilðe um arf Þorsteins <anchor id=a96.2>við Trefil, þvi at hann vilde halda í hendr b&aolig;rnom Þórarens.<note place=apparatus id=an96.1><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þorsteinn Surtr átte ... b&aolig;rnom Þórarens]</ab> add. S. átte ...] blank for name in S.</note>

<p n=20.2><anchor id=a96.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þorbi&aolig;rn Loke hét maðr, son B&aolig;ðmóðs or Skut; hann fór <anchor id=a96.4>til Íslannz ok nam Diúpa-fi&aolig;rð, ok Gró-nes til Gufu-fiarðar. Hans <anchor id=a96.5>son vas Þórgils á Þórgils-st&aolig;ðom í Diúpa-firðe, faðer Collz es átte<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a96.6>Þóríðe Þóris dóttor, Hallaðar sonar iarls, Rognvallz sonar iarls.<note place=apparatus id=an96.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Rognvallz s. iarls]</ab> add. S.</note> <anchor id=a96.7>Þórgils son þeirra átte Otkotlo, dóttor I&aolig;rundar, Atla sonar ens <anchor id=a96.8>Rauða; þeirra son vas I&aolig;rundr; hann átte Hallveigo, dóttor Oddz, <anchor id=a96.9>Ýra<hi>r</hi> sonar ok Cetils Gufo. Snorre vas I&aolig;rundar son, es átte <anchor id=a96.10>Ásnýjo, dóttor Víga-Sturlo; þeirra son vas Gils, es átte Þórdíse<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a96.11>Goðlaugs dóttor, ok dóttor<note place=apparatus id=an96.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok dóttor]</ab> thus.</note> Þórk&aolig;tlo, Halldórs dóttor, Snorra sonar <anchor id=a96.12>Goða. En son Gils vas Þórðr<note place=apparatus id=an96.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas Þórðr]</ab> S; om. Cd.</note>, es átte Vígdíse Svertings dóttor <anchor id=a96.13><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>þeirra son var Hvamm-Sturla<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=20.3><anchor id=a96.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Cetill Gufa hét maðr, son &OElig;rlygs, B&aolig;ðvars sonar, Vígsterks <anchor id=a96.15>sonar; &OElig;rlygr átte Signýjo, Óblauðs dóttor, systor H&aolig;gna ens<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a96.16>Hvíta. Cetill son þeirra kom út síð land-náma-tíðar: hann hafðe <anchor id=a96.17>veret í vestr-víking, ok haft af Írlande þræla Írska: hét einn Þor&shy;modr, <anchor id=a96.18>annarr Flóke, Core, ok Svartr, ok Scorar tveir. Cetill tók <anchor id=a96.19>Rosmhvala-nes; sat hann þar enn fyrsta vetr at Gufu-sk&aoacute;lom. <anchor id=a96.20>En um váret fór hann inn á Nes, ok sat at Gufo-nese annan vet<hi>t</hi>r.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb97 n=97><note place=margin>[133: ii. 24.]</note><p n=20.3.1><anchor id=a97.1>Þá hliópo þeir Skore enn ellre ok Flóke á braut með konor tvær <anchor id=a97.2>ok fé mikit; þeir vóro á laun í Skorra-holte; en þeir vóro drepner <anchor id=a97.3>í Flóka-dale ok Skora-dale.

<p n=20.4><anchor id=a97.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Cetill feck &oelig;ngan bú-stað á Nesjom, ok fór þaðan inn í Borgar-fi&aolig;rð; <anchor id=a97.5>ok sat enn þriðja vetr á Gufu-sk&aoacute;lom við Guf-&aoacute;: enn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a97.6>fiórða vet<hi>t</hi>r vas hann á Snæfellz-nese<note place=apparatus id=an97.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Snió-fellz, Cd.</note> at Gufu-sk&aoacute;lom. Snemma <anchor id=a97.7>um váret fór hann inn í Breiða-fi&aolig;rð at leita ser at bústað. Þá <anchor id=a97.8>vas hann í Geirmundar-st&aolig;ðom, ok bað Ýrar dóttor Geirmundar, <anchor id=a97.9>ok feck hennar. Vísaðe Geirmundr þá Catle til landa fyr vestan <anchor id=a97.10>fi&aolig;rð.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=20.5><anchor id=a97.11><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þrælar Cetils Gufu hliópo braut af Snæfellz-nese, ok kvómo<note place=apparatus id=an97.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þrælar ... kvómo]</ab> En meðan Ketill var vestr hliópu þrælar hans á braut ok kvómu, S.</note> fram <anchor id=a97.12>um nótt á Lamba-st&aolig;ðom: þar bió þá Þórðr, son Þórgeirs Lamba <anchor id=a97.13>ok Þórdísar Yngvars dóttor systor Egils Skalla-Gríms sonar.<note place=apparatus id=an97.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Þórdísar ... sonar]</ab> add. S.</note> Þrælarner <anchor id=a97.14>b&aoacute;ro þar eld at húsom, ok brendo Þórð inne ok hiún hans <anchor id=a97.15>&aolig;ll. Þeir bruto upp g&oelig;rve-búr, ok tóko v&aolig;ro mikla ok lausa-fé.<note place=apparatus id=an97.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> S; eitt búr, Cd. S; mikla í, Cd.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a97.16>Síðan r&aoacute;ko þeir heim hesta ok klyfjoðo<note place=apparatus id=an97.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Síðan ... klyfjoðo]</ab> add. S.</note> ok sn&oelig;ro á leið til Alfta-ness. <anchor id=a97.17>Lambe enn Sterke, son Þórðar, kom af þinge um morgonenn <anchor id=a97.18>þá es þeir vóro ný-farner braut; hann fór efter þeim ok menn með <anchor id=a97.19>hónom.  En es þrælarner siá þat, hlióp sínn veg hverr þeirra. <anchor id=a97.20>Þeir tóko Cora í Cora-nese; en sumer gengo á sund. Svart tóko<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a97.21>þetr í Svartz-skere; en Scora í Scor-ey; en Þormod í Þormods-skere&mdash;þat <anchor id=a97.22>es vika undan lande.

<pb id=pb98 n=98><note place=margin>[135: ii. 25.]</note><p n=20.6><anchor id=a98.1><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Cetill Gufa nam Gufu-fi&aolig;rð, ok Skála-nes til Colla-fiarðar. <anchor id=a98.2>Cetill ok Yre &aoacute;tto tvá sono: vas Þórhallr annarr, faðer Hallvarar, <anchor id=a98.3>es átte B&aolig;rkr son Þórmóðar Þióstars sonar<note place=apparatus id=an98.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Cetill ok Y ... Þióstars sonar]</ab> add. S.</note>. Odde<note place=apparatus id=an98.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Odde]</ab> Egils Saga, ch. 80, calls him Vale.</note> vas [annarr] <anchor id=a98.4>son þeirra Cetils ok Ýrar, es átte Þórlaugo, Hrólfs dóttor frá <anchor id=a98.5>Ballara-&aoacute; ok Þóríðar dóttor Valþiófs, &OElig;rlygs sonar frá Esjo-berge.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=20.7><anchor id=a98.6><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Hof-Colle Hroallz son nam Colla-fi&aolig;rð ok Cvíganda-nes<note place=apparatus id=an98.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Cvíganda-nes]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok <anchor id=a98.7>Cvígandis-fi&aolig;rð, ok selde ymsom m&aolig;nnom land-nám sítt; en hann <anchor id=a98.8>fór í Laxár-dal á H&aolig;scullz-staðe. Hann vas kallaðr Dala-Collr. <anchor id=a98.10>Hans son vas H&aolig;sculldr es átte Hallfríðe, dóttor Biarnar, es nam<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a98.11>Biarnar-fi&aolig;rð fyr norðan Steingríms-fi&aolig;rð. Þeirra son vas Þórleikr<note place=apparatus id=an98.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Þórlakr, Cd.</note>, <anchor id=a98.12>faðer Bolla es átte Goðrúno Osvifrs dóttor.

<p n=20.8><anchor id=a98.13><ab type=parNum>8<corr>.</corr></ab> Cniúcr, son Þórolfs Sparrar, es kallaðr vas Nesja-Cniúcr<note place=apparatus id=an98.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> S; Knutr, Cd. (badly).</note>; <anchor id=a98.14>hann nam nes &aolig;ll til Barða-strandar frá Cvíganda-firðe, ok bió....<note place=apparatus id=an98.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok bió]</ab> add. S, leaving a blank for the name.</note> <anchor id=a98.15>Hann átte Eyjo, dóttor Ingiallz, Helga sonar ens Magra; þeirra<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a98.16>b&aolig;rn, Einarr, faðer Steinolfs Birtings, f&aolig;ðor Salgerðar, móðor <anchor id=a98.17>Bárðar ens Svarta; ok Eyjolfr, es vas stiúp-faðer Þórbiargar Col&shy;brúnar, <anchor id=a98.18>Glúms dóttor, es Þormóðr orte um. Þórgrímr vas ok <anchor id=a98.19>Eyjolfs son, faðer Yngvilldar es átte Ulfheðinn á Víðe-mýre; ok <anchor id=a98.20>Þóra móðer Mýra-Cniúcz í Dýra-firðe. Hann vas faðer Þórgautz,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a98.21>f&aolig;ðor Steinolfs, f&aolig;ðor Þorkels <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. H&aolig;llo, m. Steinunnar, m. Hrafns <anchor id=a99.1><pb id=pb99 n=99><note place=margin>[136: i. 25.]</note>Sveinbiarnar sonar, ok Herdísar, es átte Hallr Gizorar s. Logmaðr<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an99.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> log&mtilde;, Cd.; S om. ok Herdísar ... Logmaðr.</note>.

<p n=20.8.1><anchor id=a99.2>[S: Annarr son Cniúcs vas Einarr, faðer Steinolfs, f&aolig;ðor Salgerðar, <anchor id=a99.3>móðor Bárðar Svarta. Þóra hét dótter Cniúcs, es átte <anchor id=a99.5>Þórvaldr, son Þórðar Víkings sonar. Þeirra son vas Mýra-Cniúcr,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a99.6>faðer Þórgautz, f&aolig;ðor Steinolfs <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. H&aolig;llo, m. Steinunnar, m. Hrafns <anchor id=a99.7>á Eyre<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. Cniúcr átte Eviu<note place=apparatus id=an99.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Thus S; Eyjo?</note>, dóttor Ingiallz, Helga sonar Magra. <anchor id=a99.8>Þeirra son var Eyjolfr, faðer Þórgríms Kotlo sonar. Glúmr átte <anchor id=a99.9>fyrr Kotlo, ok var þeirra dótter Þórbi&aolig;rg Colbrún es Þormóðr orte <anchor id=a99.10>um. Steingrímr hét son Þórgríms, faðer Yngvildar, es átte Ulf&shy;heðinn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a99.11>á Viðe-mýre.]

<p n=20.9><anchor id=a99.12><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Geirsteinn Cialke nam Cialka-fi&aolig;rð ok Hiarðar-nes með ráðe <anchor id=a99.13>Cniúcs; hans son vas Þórgils, faðer Steins ens Danska <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Vígdísar, <anchor id=a99.14>m. Þórunnar, m. Þórgeirs, f. Þorfinnz ábóta<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=20.9.1><anchor id=a99.15>[S: Hans son vas Þórgils es átte Þóro, dóttor Vestars af Eyre;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a99.16>þeirra son Steinn enn Danske; hann átte Hallgerðe Ornolfs dóttor, <anchor id=a99.17>Ar<hi>nm</hi>óðs-sonar ens Rauða: Ornolfr átte Vígdíse, dóttor (<hi>blank</hi>). <anchor id=a99.18>Vígdís hét dótter Steins ens Danska, ok Hallgerðar es átte Illoge <anchor id=a99.19>Steinbiarnar son. Þeirra dótter vas Þórunn, móðer Þorgeirs <anchor id=a99.20>Lang-h&aolig;fða.]<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb100 n=100><note place=margin>[137: ii. 25.]</note><p n=21.1><anchor id=a100.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>21.</hi> 1.</ab> Geirleifr, son Eiriks, H&aolig;gna sonar ens Hvíta, <anchor id=a100.2>nam Barða-str&aolig;nd miðle Vatz-fiarðar ok Berg-hlíða. <anchor id=a100.3>Hann vas faðer þeirra Oddleifs ok Helga Skarfs. Oddleifr vas <anchor id=a100.4>faðer Gestz ens Spaka, ok Þórsteins, ok Æso, es átte Þórgils, son <anchor id=a100.5>Gríms í Gríms-nese; þeirra syner vóro þeir I&aolig;rundr í Mið-enge,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a100.6>ok Þórarenn at Búrfelle.<note place=apparatus id=an100.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeirra syner ... felle]</ab> add. S (writing Berufelli).</note> B&aolig;rn Gestz vóro þau Þórðr, ok Halla, es <anchor id=a100.7>Snorre Dala-Alfs son átte; Þórgils vas son þeirra. Onnor dótter <anchor id=a100.8>Gestz vas Þórey, es Þórgils átte; Þórarenn vas son þeirra, faðer <anchor id=a100.9>Iódísar, móðor Illoga, f&aolig;ðor Birno, móðor Arnórs ok<note place=apparatus id=an100.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Arnórs ok]</ab> add. S.</note> Eyvindar. <anchor id=a100.10>Geirleifr átte Ióro, dóttor Helga. Þórfiðr hét þriðe son Geirleifs;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a100.11>hann átte Goðrúno Ásolfs dóttor. Þórsteinn Oddleifs son vas <anchor id=a100.12>faðer Ísgerðar, es átte B&aolig;lverkr, sonr Eyjolfs ens Grá; þeirra <anchor id=a100.13>son Geller L&aolig;g(sogo)-maðr. Véný vas enn dótter Þórsteins, <anchor id=a100.14>móðer Þórðar Kráko-nefs. Þaðan ero Krákneflingar komner.<note place=apparatus id=an100.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þaðan ero ...]</ab> add. S; thus, M. Kotlo, S.</note>

<p n=21.1.1><anchor id=a100.15>[S: (Arnórs ok Eyvindar.) Helge Skrápr [skarfr] vas faðer<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a100.16>Þórbiargar, móðor Kotlo es átte Þórsteinn Solmundar son; þeirra <anchor id=a100.17>syner, Refr í Brynjo-dale, ok Þórðr, faðer Illoga, f&aolig;ðor Hroð-nýjar <anchor id=a100.18>es Þórgrímr Sviðe átte. Þórdís hét &aolig;nnor dótter Helga <anchor id=a100.19>Skraps<note place=apparatus id=an100.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> skarfs?</note>, es átte Þórsteinn Ásbiarnar son or Kirkjo-b&oeacute; austan. <anchor id=a100.20>Þeirra son vas Surtr, faðer Sigvatz L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz. Geirleifr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a101.1><pb id=pb101 n=101><note place=margin>[138: ii. 26.]</note>átte Ióro Helga dóttor. Þórfinnr hét enn þriðe son Geirleifs; <anchor id=a101.2>hann átte Goðrúno Ásolfs dóttor. Ásmundr hét son þeirra; hann <anchor id=a101.3>átte Hallk&aolig;tlo, dóttor Biarnar, Mars sonar, Ásmundar sonar; <anchor id=a101.4>Hlenne hét son þeirra; hann átte Ægi-leifu<note place=apparatus id=an101.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Æsi-, S.</note>, dóttor Þórsteins Croflo&shy;sonar; <anchor id=a101.5>Þórfiðr vas son þeirra, faðer Þórgeirs Lang-h&aolig;fða. Þórsteinn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a101.6>Oddleifsson, &amp;c.]

<p n=21.2><anchor id=a101.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Gróa en Cristna vas dótter Geirleifs, móðer Helga, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a101.8>Ósvifrs, f&aolig;ðor Goðrúnar, móðor Bolla, f&aolig;ðor Herdísar, móðor <anchor id=a101.9>Coðrans.<note place=apparatus id=an101.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Groa ...]</ab> this paragraph is only preserved in M.</note>

<p n=21.3><anchor id=a101.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ar<hi>n</hi>móðr enn Rauðe, Þórbiarnar son, fóstr-bróðer<note place=apparatus id=an101.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> fostr-f., S.</note> Geirleifs,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a101.11>nam Rauða-sand. Hans syner vóro þeir Ornolfr, ok Þórbi&aolig;rn, <anchor id=a101.12>faðer Hrólfs ens Rauð-senzka.

<p n=21.4><anchor id=a101.13><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórolfr Sp&aolig;rr kom út með &OElig;rlyge, ok nam Patrecs-fi&aolig;rð <anchor id=a101.14>fyr vestan, ok Víkr fyr vestan Barð; nema Collz-vík: þar bió <anchor id=a101.15>Collr fóst-bróðer &OElig;rlygs.  Þórolfr nam Kefla-vík fyr sunnan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a101.16>Barð, ok bió at Hval-l&aolig;trom.<note place=apparatus id=an101.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok bió at Hval-l&aolig;trom]</ab> add. S.</note> Þeir Nesja-Cniúcr ok Ingolfr enn <anchor id=a101.17>Sterke, ok Geirþiófr vóro syner Þórolfs Sparrar. Þórarna vas <anchor id=a101.18>dótter Ingolfs, es Þórsteinn Oddleifs son átte.

<p n=21.5><anchor id=a101.19><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórbi&aolig;rn Talcne ok Þórbi&aolig;rn Scúma, syner B&aolig;ðvars<note place=apparatus id=an101.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>B&aolig;ðvars]</ab> add. S.</note> Bloðro-skalla, <anchor id=a101.20>kómo út með &OElig;rlyge. Þeir n&aoacute;mo Patrecs-fi&aolig;rð halfan,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a101.21>ok Talcna-fi&aolig;rð allan til Kópa-ness.

<p n=21.6><anchor id=a101.22><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Cetill Il-breiðr, son Þórbiarnar Talcna, nam Dala alla frá <anchor id=a102.1><pb id=pb102 n=102><note place=margin>[139: ii. 26.]</note>Kópa-nese til Dufans-dals. Hann gaf Þór&aolig;rno dóttor sína Her&shy;gilse <anchor id=a102.2>Hnappraz: rézk Cetill þá suðr í Breiða-fi&aolig;rð, ok nam Bero&shy;fi&aolig;rd <anchor id=a102.3>hiá Reykja-nese.


<p n=22.1><anchor id=a102.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>22.</hi> 1.</ab> Orn hét maðr ág&aelig;tr, hann vas fr&aelig;nde Geirmundar <anchor id=a102.5>Heljar-skinnz.<note place=apparatus id=an102.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann vas ... skinnz]</ab> add. S.</note> Hann fór af Roga-lande fyr ofríke<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a102.6>Harallz konungs. Hann nam Arnar-fi&aolig;rð allan.<note place=apparatus id=an102.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Hann nam land í Arnarfirðe svá vítt sem hann vilde, S.</note> Hann sat um <anchor id=a102.7>vetrenn á Tialda-nese; þvi at þar geck eige sól af um <anchor id=a102.8>skamm&shy;dege.

<p n=22.2><anchor id=a102.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ánn Rauðfeldr, son Gríms Loðin-kinna or <hi>H</hi>rafnisto, ok <anchor id=a102.10>sonr Helgo, dóttor Ánar Bog-sveigiss, varð mis-sáttr við Harald<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a102.11>konung; ok fór því ór lande í vestr-víking. Hann herjaðe<note place=apparatus id=an102.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> enn Harfagra, add. S.</note> á Írland, <anchor id=a102.12>ok feck þar Greladar, dóttor Biartmars iarls. Þau fóro til Íslannz, <anchor id=a102.13>ok kómo í Arnar-fi&aolig;rð vettre síðarr an Orn. Orn vas enn fyrsta <anchor id=a102.14>vettr í Dufans-dale; þar þótte Grelodo ílla ilma or i&aolig;rðo. Orn <anchor id=a102.15>spurðe til Hámundar Heljar-skinnz norðr í Eyja-firðe, fr&aelig;nda síns,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a102.16>ok fýstesk hann þangat.<note place=apparatus id=an102.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok f. h. þangat]</ab> add. S.</note> Því selde hann Áne Rauðfelld l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll <anchor id=a102.17>miðle Langa-ness ok Stapa. Hann g&oelig;rðe bú á Eyre; þar þótte <anchor id=a102.18>Grelodo hunangs-ilmr or grase.

<p n=22.3><anchor id=a102.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Dufane þræle sínom gaf Án Dufans-dal.<note place=apparatus id=an102.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Dufane ... -dal]</ab> Dufan var leysingi Anarr hann bió eptir í Dufans-dal, S.</note> Biartmár vas son Ánar, <anchor id=a102.20>faðer Végesta tveggja, ok Helga, foðor Þóríðar, móðor<note place=apparatus id=an102.6><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>móðor]</ab> emend.; z (z = <hi rend="font(rotunda)">m</hi>), Cd.; om. S.</note> Arnkotlo,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a103.1><pb id=pb103 n=103><note place=margin>[141: ii. 26.]</note>es átte Helge Eyþjófs son.<note place=apparatus id=an103.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es átte ... Eyþ. son]</ab> add. S.</note> Þórhildr vas dótter Biartmárs, es átte <anchor id=a103.2>Vésteinn Végeirs son. Auðr ok Vésteinn vóro b&aolig;rn þeirra.

<p n=22.4><anchor id=a103.3><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hiallcar vas leysinge Ánar; hans sonr vas Bi&aolig;rn þræll <anchor id=a103.4>Biartmárs. Hann gaf Birne frelse: þá gr&oeacute;dde hann fé. Végestr <anchor id=a103.5>vandaðe um, ok lagðe hann spióte í g&oelig;gnom; en Bi&aolig;rn laust<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a103.6>hann með grefe til bana.

<p n=22.5><anchor id=a103.7><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Geirþiófr Valþiófs son nam enn land í Arnar-firðe, Fors-fi&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a103.8>Reykjar-fi&aolig;rð, Trostans-fi&aolig;rð, Geirþiófs-fi&aolig;rð, ok allt til Langa-ness, <anchor id=a103.9>ok bió í Geirþiófs-firðe. Hann átte Salgerðe<note place=apparatus id=an103.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Valgerde, S.</note>, dóttor Ulfs <anchor id=a103.10>ens Skiálga; þeirra son H&aolig;gne, faðer Atla, f&aolig;ðor H&aolig;scullz, f&aolig;ðor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a103.11>Atla, f&aolig;ðor Bárðar Svarta <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Sveinbiarnar, f. Hrafns, f. Steinunnar, <anchor id=a103.12>m. Herra Rafns<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=22.5.1><anchor id=a103.13>[S: (Þeirra son H&aolig;gne.) Hann átte Auðe, dóttor Óláfs Iafna-collz <anchor id=a103.14>ok Þóro Gunnsteins dóttor. Atle vas son þeirra; hann átte <anchor id=a103.15>Þóríðe, Þórleifs dóttor, Eyvindar sonar Cnés ok Þóríðar Rúm-gyltu.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a103.16>Þórleifr átte Gró, dóttor Þórolfs Brækis. H&aolig;sculldr vas <anchor id=a103.17>son Atla, faðer Bárðar ens Svarta.]

<p n=22.6><anchor id=a103.18><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Eirekr hét maðr, es nam Keldo-dal fyr sunnan Dýra-fi&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a103.19>ok Slétta-nes til Stapa í Arnar-firðe; en til Hals ens ýtra í Dýra-firðe. <anchor id=a103.20>Hann vas faðer Þórkels, f&aolig;ðor Þórðar, f&aolig;ðor Þorkels, f&aolig;ðor<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a103.21>Steinolfs, f&aolig;ðor Þórðar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Þórleifar, m. Þóru, m. Guðmundar <anchor id=a103.22>Gríss, er átte Solveigo dóttor Ións Loptz sonar. Þeirra born vóro, <anchor id=a104.1><pb id=pb104 n=104><note place=margin>[142: ii. 27.]</note>Magnus Goðe, ok Þorlákr f. Arna byscops, ok Þóra m. Gizorar <anchor id=a104.2>iarls<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.<note place=apparatus id=an104.1><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>er átte ... iarls]</ab> om. S.</note>

<p n=22.6.1><anchor id=a104.3><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>S: (Gudmundar Gríss.) Þórleif var m. Liny, m. Ceciliu, m. <anchor id=a104.4>Bárðar ok Þórgerðar er átte Biorn enn Enske. Þeirra born vóro <anchor id=a104.5>þau Arnis ábóte ok Þóra er átte Ámunde Þórgeirs son.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=22.7><anchor id=a104.6><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Vésteinn, son Végeirs, bróðer Vébiarnar Sygna-kappa, nam <anchor id=a104.7>land miðle halsa í Dýra-firðe ok bió í Hauka-dale; hann átte <anchor id=a104.8>Þórhilde Biartmárs dóttor. Þeirra b&aolig;rn Vésteinn ok Auðr.<note place=apparatus id=an104.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeirra baorn ... Auðr]</ab> add. S.</note>

<p n=22.8><anchor id=a104.9><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þórbi&aolig;rn Súrr kom út at albygðo lande; hónom gaf Vésteinn <anchor id=a104.10>halfan Hauka-dal. Hans b&aolig;rn vóro þau Gísle<note place=apparatus id=an104.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Gísli, ok Þorkell, ok Are, S.</note>, es átte Auðe Vésteins<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a104.11>dóttor; ok Þorkell, es átte Sígríðe Sleito-Biarnar dóttor; ok <anchor id=a104.12>Þórdís, es átte Þórgrímr Þorsteins son: þeirra son Snorre Goðe. <anchor id=a104.13>Síðan átte Þórdíse Borkr enn Digre; þeirra dótter Þórríðr, es átte <anchor id=a104.14>Þórbi&aolig;rn Digre, en síðarr Þóroddr Skatt-kaupande: þeirra son <anchor id=a104.15>vas Ceartan at Fróð-&aoacute;.<note place=apparatus id=an104.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Síðan átte Þ ... at Fróð-&aoacute; add. S.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab>


<p n=23.1><anchor id=a104.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>23.</hi> 1.</ab> Dýre hét maðr ágætr<note place=apparatus id=an104.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ágætr]</ab> add. S.</note> es fór af Sunn-m&oeacute;re til <anchor id=a104.17>Íslannz, at ráðe R&aolig;gnvallz iarls. Hann nam Dýra-fi&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a104.18>ok bió at Halsom. Hans son vas Hrafn, es bió á Cetils-eyre, <anchor id=a104.19>faðer Þóríðar es átte Vésteinn Vésteins son; þeirra syner <anchor id=a104.20>Bergr ok Helge.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=23.2><anchor id=a104.21><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þórðr hét maðr Víkings son<note place=apparatus id=an104.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Þ. h. m. V. s. eðr s. H. ks. Hárf.; hann fór til Isl. ok nam land milli þúfu, etc., S.</note>, es flester kalla veret hafa son <anchor id=a105.1><pb id=pb105 n=105><note place=margin>[143: ii. 27.]</note>Harallz konungs Hárfagra. Hónom gaf Dýre land miðle á Þúfo <anchor id=a105.2>á Hialla-nese, ok Iarð-fallz-gils; ok bió í Alviðru. Hann átte <anchor id=a105.3>Þióð<hi>h</hi>ilde, dóttor Eyvindar Austmannz<note place=apparatus id=an105.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dóttor Eyv. Austmannz]</ab> add. S.</note>, systor Helga (ens) Magra. <anchor id=a105.4>Þeirra son vas Þórkell Kappe enn Auðge, es þar bió síðan<note place=apparatus id=an105.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>síðan]</ab> Hann átte, add. S, leaving blank for the name.</note>. Hans <anchor id=a105.5>son vas Þórðr Orvond; ok Eyjolfr, faðer Gísla es átte Hallgerðe,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a105.6>dóttor Vermundar ens Mióva; þeirra son Brandr, faðer Goðmundar <anchor id=a105.7>prestz í Hiarðar-holte, f&aolig;ðor Magnus prestz, en dótter <anchor id=a105.8>Þóra, es átte Brandr Þórhaddz son. Þeirra b&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an105.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>b&aolig;rn]</ab> thus, S.</note>, Steinv&aolig;r, móðer <anchor id=a105.9>Rannveigar; móðor Sæhildar es Gizorr [byscop] átte. Helge hét <anchor id=a105.10>annarr son Eyjolfs; hans b&aolig;rn vóro þau Óláfr, ok Goðlaug es<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a105.11>Fi<hi rend=sup>r</hi>ska-Fiðr átte<note place=apparatus id=an105.4><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en dótter Þóra ... Fiðr átte]</ab> add. S.</note>. Þórvaldr Hvíte hét annarr son Þórðar Víkings <anchor id=a105.12>sonar; hann átte Þóro Cniúcs dóttor<note place=apparatus id=an105.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> dóttor Nesja-kniuks, S.</note>. Þeirra son Þórðr Hvíte eða <anchor id=a105.13>Orvond es átte Ásdíse Þormoðs dóttor, móðor Ulfs Stallara. Dótter <anchor id=a105.14>Þórðar Orvandar (vas) Oddkatla<note place=apparatus id=an105.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Ottk., Cd.</note>, es átte Sturla Þióðreks son; <anchor id=a105.15>þeirra son Þórðr, es átte Hallbero, dóttor Snorra Goða. Ásný vas<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a105.16>dótter Sturlo, es Snorre Iorundar son átte. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Þeirra dótter Þórdís, <anchor id=a105.17>m. Hoscullz lækniss, f. Margretar, m. Þorfinnz Ábóta.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>

<p n=23.2.2><anchor id=a105.18>[S: (Þóro d. Nesja-Cniucs.) Þeirra son vas Mýra-Cniúcr, faðer <anchor id=a105.19>Þórgautz, f&aolig;ðor Steinolfs, es átte Herdíse Tinnz dóttor; þeirra <anchor id=a106.1><pb id=pb106 n=106><note place=margin>[144: ii. 28.]</note>b&aolig;rn vóro þau Þorkell á Mýrom, ok Halla es átte Þórðr Oddleifs <anchor id=a106.2>son. Annarr son Þórvallz Hvíta vas Þórðr &ocedil;r<hi>u</hi>&ocedil;ndr, es átte Ásdíse, <anchor id=a106.3>Þórgríms dóttor Harðrefs sonar. Móðer Ásdísar vas Rannveig, <anchor id=a106.4>dótter Griótgarðar Hlaða-iarls. Ásdís vas móðer Ulfs Stallara, en <anchor id=a106.5>syster Liótz ens Spaka, ok Halldísar es Þórbi&aolig;rn Þióðreks son átte.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a106.6>Dótter þeirra Þórðar Orvandar vas Ottkatla, es átte Sturla Þióðreks <anchor id=a106.7>son: þeirra son Þórðr, es átte Hallbero, dóttor Snorra Goða: <anchor id=a106.8>þeirra dótter Þóríðr, es átte Hafliðe Márs son. Snorre vas son <anchor id=a106.9>Þórðar Sturlo sonar, es átte Oddbi&aolig;rgo, dótter Gríms Loðmundar <anchor id=a106.10>sonar: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau Flugo-Grímr ok Hallbera, es Mág-Snorre<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a106.11>átte. D&oeacute;tr Sturlo vóro sex; ein vas Asný, es Snorre <anchor id=a106.12>I&aolig;rundar son átte; þeirra dótter Þórdís, móðer Hoscullz læknis. <anchor id=a106.13>Son þeirra Snorra ok Ásnýjar vas Gils, faðer Þórðar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f&aolig;ðor Sturlo <anchor id=a106.14>í Hvamme<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.]

<p n=23.3><anchor id=a106.15><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ingialldr Brúna son nam Ingiallz-sand, á miðle Hialla-ness<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a106.16>ok Úf&oeacute;ro<note place=apparatus id=an106.1><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Úf&oeacute;ro]</ab> til Úfæro, S. Hann vas faðer ... Liótz] S; hann var f. Þorgríms f. Þorbiarnar Skumo, f. Liótz, H.</note>. Hann vas faðer Harðrefs, f&aolig;ðor Þórgríms, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a106.17>þeirra Liótz, sem áðr vas ritið.


<p n=24.1><anchor id=a106.18><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>24.</hi> <note place=apparatus id=an106.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Chapter 24. 1&ndash;2 is taken from S; H omits it.</note>1.</ab> Liótr enn Spake bió at Ingiallz-sande, son Þórgríms <anchor id=a106.19>Harðrefs sonar; en móðer hans vas Rannveig, <anchor id=a106.20>dóttor Griótgarðar iarls. Þórgrímr Gagarr vas son Liótz. Hall-díse,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a106.21>systor Liótz, átte Þórbi&aolig;rn Þióðreks son; en Ásdíse, aðra <anchor id=a107.1><pb id=pb107 n=107><note place=margin>[145: ii. 28.]</note>systor Liótz, nam Óspakr Osvifs son. Um þá s&aolig;k sótte Liótr Óspak <anchor id=a107.2>til sekðar. Ulfr hét son þeirra: þann f&oeacute;dde Liótr.

<p n=24.2><anchor id=a107.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Grímr K&aolig;gor bió á Brecko: hans syner vóro þeir Sigurðr <anchor id=a107.4>ok Þorkell, lítler menn ok smáer. Þórarenn hét fóstr-son Liótz. <anchor id=a107.5>Liótr kauper slátr at Gríme til tottogo hundraða, ok galt veite-enge,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a107.6>es hét Gers&oelig;me. L&oeacute;kr fell meðal landa þeirra: Grímr <anchor id=a107.7>veitte hónom á eng sína, ok gróf land Liótz; en hann gaf s&aolig;k á <anchor id=a107.8>því; ok vas fátt með þeim.<note place=apparatus id=an107.1 lang="en-UK"><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef lang=is>Gers&oelig;me. Loékr ...]</ab> thus emend, according to Havarðar Saga; <foreign lang=is>ok galt læk er fell meðal landa þeira, sá hét osóme, S; see notes. Havarðar Saga&mdash;&ldquo;Þeir Liótr ok Þorbiorn [Grímr] átto eitt veite-enge báðer saman, var þat et (!) mesta gerseme ... En sa l&oeacute;kr féll fyrir neðan b&oelig; Liótz er fell á engit á vórit; vóro þar í stíflur ok vel um buit.&rsquo;</foreign> The <hi>meadow</hi>, not the brook, took the name <hi>Jewel</hi>.</note>

<p n=24.2.1><anchor id=a107.9>Liótr tók við Austmanne í Vaðle; sá lagðe hug á Ásdíse. Gestr <anchor id=a107.10>Oddleifs son sótte haust-boð til Liótz. Þá kom þar Egill Volo-Steins<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a107.11>son, ok bað Gest, at hann legðe ráð til at f&aolig;ðor hans <anchor id=a107.12>b&oeacute;ttesk hel-stríð, es hann bar um Ogmund son sínn. Gestr orte <anchor id=a107.13>upphaf at<note place=apparatus id=an107.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> af, S.</note> Ogmundar-dr&aoacute;po.

<p n=24.2.2><anchor id=a107.14>Liótr spurðe Gest, hvat manna Þórgrímr Gagarr monde verða. <anchor id=a107.15>Gestr kvað Þórarenn fóstra hans frægra<note place=apparatus id=an107.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>frægra]</ab> frægan, S.</note> mondo verða; ok bað<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a107.16>Þórarenn við siá, at eige vefðesk hár þat um h&aolig;fot hónom es lá á <anchor id=a107.17>tungo hans. Óvirðing þótte Lióte þetta; ok spurðe um morgonenn <anchor id=a107.18>hvat fyr Þórgríme læge. Gestr kvað Ulf systor son hans <anchor id=a107.19>mondo frægra verða. Þá varð Liótr reiðr, ok reið þó á leið með <anchor id=a107.20>Geste; ok spurðe: &lsquo;Hvat mon mer at bana verða?&rsquo; Gestr kvezk<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a108.1><pb id=pb108 n=108><note place=margin>[146: ii. 28.]</note>eige siá &oelig;rl&aolig;g hans; en bað hann vesa vel við nábua sína. Liótr <anchor id=a108.2>spurðe: &lsquo;Mono iarð-lýsnar, syner Gríms K&aolig;gors, verða mer at <anchor id=a108.3>bana?&rsquo; &lsquo;Sárt bítr solten lús,&rsquo; kvað Gestr. &lsquo;Hvar mon þat verða?&rsquo; <anchor id=a108.4>kvað Liótr. &lsquo;Heðra nær,&rsquo; kvað Gestr.

<p n=24.2.3><anchor id=a108.5>Austmaðr reidde Gest á heiðe upp, ok studde Gest á bake, es<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a108.6>hestr rasaðe under hónom. Þá mælte Gestr: &lsquo;Happ sótte þik <anchor id=a108.7>nú; en brátt mon annat. Gættú, at þer verðe þat eige at óhappe.&rsquo; <anchor id=a108.8>Austmaðr enn fann graf-silfr; en<note place=apparatus id=an108.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en]</ab> er, S.</note> hann fór heim ok tók af tottogo <anchor id=a108.9>pennínga, ok ætlaðe, at hann m&oelig;nde feta til síðarr; en es hann <anchor id=a108.10>leitaðe, fann hann eige. En Liótr feck teket hann es hann vas at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a108.11>grefte; ok g&oelig;rðe af hónom þriú hundrað fyr hvern penning.

<p n=24.2.4><anchor id=a108.12>Þat haust vas vegenn Þórbi&aolig;rn Þióðreks son.

<p n=24.2.5><anchor id=a108.13>Um várit sat Liótr at þrælom sínom á hæð einne; hann vas í <anchor id=a108.14>k&aoacute;po, ok vas h&aolig;ttrenn lerkaðr um halsenn, ok ein ermr á. Þeir <anchor id=a108.15>K&aolig;gors-syner hliópo á hæðena, ok hioggo til hans báðer senn.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a108.16>Efter þat snaraðe Þorkell h&aolig;ttenn at h&aolig;fðe<note place=apparatus id=an108.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at h&aolig;fðe]</ab> emend.; af h., S. kvað ... lítt] emend.; bað þá láta gott, S.</note> hónom. Liótr kvað <anchor id=a108.17>þá láta lítt í bú-sifjom sínom; ok hr&aolig;poðo þeir af hæðenne á <anchor id=a108.18>g&aolig;to þá es Gestr hafðe riðet. Þar dó Liótr. Þeir Gríms-syner <anchor id=a108.19>fóro til Hávarðar Hallta. Eyjolfr Gráe veitte þeim &aolig;llom, ok <anchor id=a108.20>Steingrímr son hans.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb109 n=109><note place=margin>[147: ii. 29.]</note>

<p n=24.3><anchor id=a109.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hallvarðr Súgande vas í orrosto á móte Haralde konunge í <anchor id=a109.2>Hafrs-firðe. Hann fór af Sætrom af H&aolig;rða-lande til Íslannz, ok <anchor id=a109.3>nam Súganda-fi&aolig;rð ok Skála-vík til Stiga<note place=apparatus id=an109.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>til Stiga, ok b. þar]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok bió þar.

<p n=24.4><anchor id=a109.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an109.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> S interchanges §§ 3 and 4.</note>Onundr Víkings son, bróðer Þórðar í Alviðro, nam Onundar-fi&aolig;rð <anchor id=a109.5>allan, ok bió á Eyre.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=24.5><anchor id=a109.6><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórríðr Sunda-fyller, ok Volo-Steinn son hennar, fór<hi>o</hi> af <anchor id=a109.7>Háloga-lande til Íslannz, ok n&aoacute;mo Bulungar-vík, ok bioggo í <anchor id=a109.8>Vatz-nese. Hon vas því k&aolig;lloð Sunda-fyller, at hon seið<note place=apparatus id=an109.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>seið]</ab> seidde, S.</note> til þess <anchor id=a109.9>í hallære á Háloga-lande, at hvert sund vas fullt af sílð<note place=apparatus id=an109.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sílð]</ab> fiskom, S.</note>; hon <anchor id=a109.10>sette ok Kviar-mið á Ísafiarðar-diúpe, ok tók til &aoacute; kollótta af<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a109.11>hverjom bo<hi>a</hi>nda í Ísa-firðe. Syner Volo-Steins vóro þeir Ogmundr <anchor id=a109.12>ok Egill.

<p n=24.6><anchor id=a109.13><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Helge hét son Hrólfs or Gnúpo-felle<note place=apparatus id=an109.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> -fialle, Cd.</note>, ok vas Upplenzkr at <anchor id=a109.14>móðor ætt, ok vóx þar upp. Hann fór til Íslannz at vilja frænda <anchor id=a109.15>sinna. Hann kom í Eyja-fi&aolig;rð, ok vas þar þá al-bygt. Efter þat<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a109.16>vill hann útan, ok varð aftr-reka í Súganda-fi&aolig;rð. Hann vas of <anchor id=a109.17>vetr með Hallvarðe; en of váret fór hann at leita ser bústaðar; <anchor id=a109.18>hann fann fi&aolig;rð, ok hitte þar skutel í fl&oeacute;ðar-mále. Þar kallaðe <anchor id=a110.1><pb id=pb110 n=110><note place=margin>[148: ii. 29.]</note>hann Skutils-fi&aolig;rð. Þar bygðe hann síðan. Hans son vas Þórsteinn <anchor id=a110.2>Úgæfa; hann fór útan, ok vá hirð-mann Hákonar iarls <anchor id=a110.3>Griótgarðz sonar; en Eyvindr ráðgiafe iarls sende hann til Vébiarnar <anchor id=a110.4>Sygna-trausta; hann tók við hónom; en Védís syster <anchor id=a110.5>hans latte þess. Fyrer þat selðe Vébi&aolig;rn eigner sínar, ok fór til<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a110.6>Íslannz, es hann treysti<hi>sk</hi> eige at halda mannenn<note place=apparatus id=an110.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es hann ... mannenn]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=24.7><anchor id=a110.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þórolfr Bræker nam suman Skutils-fi&aolig;rð, ok Skála-vík, ok <anchor id=a110.8>bió þar.

<p n=24.8><anchor id=a110.9><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Eyvindr<note place=apparatus id=an110.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> S; Onundr, Cd.</note> Cné fór af Ogðom til Íslannz, ok Þórríðr Rúm-gylta <anchor id=a110.10>kona hans. Þau n&aoacute;mo Alfta-fi&aolig;rð, ok Seyðis-fi&aolig;rð, ok bioggo<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a110.11>þar. Þeirra son Þórleifr, es fyrr vas geteð; ok Valbrandr, faðer <anchor id=a110.12>Hallgríms<note place=apparatus id=an110.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>faðer Hallgr., ok Gunnars]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok Gunnars, ok Biargeyjar<note place=apparatus id=an110.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Biargeyjar]</ab> S; Biargey, Cd.</note> es átte Hávarðr Halte: <anchor id=a110.13>þeirra son vas Óláfr.


<p n=25.1><anchor id=a110.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>25.</hi> 1.</ab> Geirr hét maðr ágætr í Sogne. Hann vas kallaðr <anchor id=a110.15>Vé-Geirr; þvi at hann vas blót-maðr mikill. Hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a110.16>átte m&aolig;rg b&aolig;rn: Vébi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an110.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Vebiorn, S; om. Cd.  Svigna-, S.</note> Sygna-kappe vas ellztr sona hans; en <anchor id=a110.17>Vésteinn, ok Véþormr, ok Vémundr, ok Végestr, Veþ&aolig;rn, en <anchor id=a110.18>Védís dótter. Efter andlát Végeirs varð Vébi&aolig;rn ósáttr við <anchor id=a110.19>Hákon iarl, sem fyrr vas getið; því fóro<note place=apparatus id=an110.6><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Efter ... fóro]</ab> add. S; þau systkin fóro, H.</note> þau systkin til Íslannz. <anchor id=a110.20>Þau h&aolig;fðo úte-vist harða ok langa: þau tóko um haust Hl&aolig;ðo-vík<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a110.21>fyr vestan Horn. Þá feck Vébi&aolig;rn at blóte miklo; ok kvað Hákon <anchor id=a110.22>iarl blóta þann dag þeim til úþurftar. En es hann vas at blóteno, <anchor id=a110.23>eggjoðo br&oeacute;ðr hans hann til braut-farar, ok g&aoacute;ðo þeir eige <anchor id=a111.1><pb id=pb111 n=111><note place=margin>[149: ii. 29.]</note>blótzens; ok léto þeir út. Þeir bruto enn sama dag skip sítt <anchor id=a111.2>under h&aolig;mrom miklom í ill-viðre. Þar kómosk þau nauðoliga <anchor id=a111.3>upp, ok geck Vébi&aolig;rn fyrir. Þat es nú k&aolig;lloð Sygna-kleif. En <anchor id=a111.4>um vetrenn tók við þeim &aolig;llom Atle í Flióte<note place=apparatus id=an111.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4</ab> <ab type=textRef>í Flióte]</ab> add. S.</note>, þræll Geirmundar <anchor id=a111.5>Heljar-skinnz, ok bað þau &oelig;ngo launa vistena; sagðe Geirmund<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a111.6>eige vanta mat. En es Atle fann Geirmund, spurðe Geirmundr, <anchor id=a111.7>hví hann vas svá diarfr, at taka slíka menn upp á kost hans. Atle <anchor id=a111.8>svaraðe: &lsquo;Því at þat man uppe meðan Ísland es byggt, hverso <anchor id=a111.9>mikils-háttar sá maðr m&oelig;nde vesa, at einn þræll þorðe at g&oelig;ra <anchor id=a111.10>slíkt útan hans orlofs.&rsquo; Geirmundr svarar: &lsquo;Fyrer þetta þítt við-t&oeacute;ke<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a111.11>skaltú þiggja frelse, ok bú þetta, es þú hefer varð-veitt.&rsquo; Ok <anchor id=a111.12>varð Atle síðan mikil-menne.

<p n=25.2><anchor id=a111.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Vébi&aolig;rn nam um váret land miðle Skoto-fiarðar ok Hest-fiarðar, <anchor id=a111.14>svá vítt sem hann genge<note place=apparatus id=an111.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14</ab> S; gengr, Cd.</note> um á dag; ok því meirr se<hi>m</hi> <anchor id=a111.15>kallaðr es Fola-fótr.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a111.16>Vébi&aolig;rn vas víga-maðr mikill; ok es saga mikil frá hónom. <anchor id=a111.17>Hann gaf Védíse, systor sína, Grímolfe í Unaðs-dale: þeir urðo <anchor id=a111.18>mis-sátter, ok vá Vébi&aolig;rn hann hiá Grímolfs-v&aolig;tnom. Fyrer þat <anchor id=a111.19>vas Vébi&aolig;rn vegenn á Þingeyrar-þinge í Dýra-firðe<note place=apparatus id=an111.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19</ab> &amp; fiorðungs-þingi á Þórsnese, S (erroneously?).</note>, ok þrír menn <anchor id=a111.20>aðrer.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb112 n=112><note place=margin>[150: ii. 30.]</note>

<p n=26.1><anchor id=a112.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>26.</hi> 1.</ab> Gunnsteinn ok Halldórr héto syner Gunnbiarnar, <anchor id=a112.2>es Gunnbiarnar-sker &apos;ro við kend. Gunnbi&aolig;rn vas <anchor id=a112.3>son Ulfs Kr&aoacute;ko. Þeir n&aoacute;mo Skoto-fi&aolig;rð, ok Laugar-dal, ok Ogurs-vík<note place=apparatus id=an112.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Augrs-vík, H; Augr-vík, S.</note> <anchor id=a112.4>til Mióva-fiarðar. Berse vas son Halldórs, faðer Þórmóðar <anchor id=a112.5>Colbrúnar-skallz. Þar í Laugar-dale bió síðan Þórbi&aolig;rn Þióðreks<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a112.6>son, es vá Óláf, son Hávarðar Halta ok Biargeyjar Valbranz-dóttor.&mdash;Þar <anchor id=a112.7>af g&oelig;rðesk Saga Ísfirðinga, ok víg Þórbiarnar.

<p n=26.2><anchor id=a112.8><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Snæbi&aolig;rn, son Eyvindar Austmannz, bróðer Helga Magra, <anchor id=a112.9>nam land miðle Mióva-fiarðar ok Langa-dals-ár, ok bió í Vatz-firðe. <anchor id=a112.10>Hans son vas Holmsteinn, faðer Snæbiarnar Gallta, es vá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a112.11>Hallbi&aolig;rn, son Oddz at Kiðja-berge, hiá Hallbiarnar-v&aolig;rðom. <anchor id=a112.12>Hann hafðe áðr veget Hallgerðe kono sína, dóttor Tungo-Oddz. <anchor id=a112.13>Móðer Snæbiarnar Galltar vas Ceolvor, ok vóro þeir Tungo-Oddr <anchor id=a112.14>systra-syner. Snæbi&aolig;rn vas fóstraðr í Þingnese með Þórodde, en <anchor id=a112.15>stundom vas hann með Tungo-Odde eða móðor sínne.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=26.3><anchor id=a112.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hallbi&aolig;rn, son Oddz frá Kiðja-berge, Hallkels sonar, bróðor <anchor id=a112.17>Ketilbiarnar ens Gamla, feck Hallgerðar, dóttor Tungo-Oddz. <anchor id=a112.18>Þau vóro með Odde enn fyrsta vetr. Þá vas Snæbi&aolig;rn Gallte þar. <anchor id=a112.19>Óástugt vas með þeim hiónom. Hallbi&aolig;rn bió ferð sína um váret <anchor id=a112.20>at Far-d&aolig;gom. En es hann vas í búnaðe, fór Oddr frá húse til<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a112.21>laugar í Reykja-holt.&mdash;Þar vóro sauða-hús hans&mdash;ok vilde hann <anchor id=a113.1><pb id=pb113 n=113><note place=margin>[151: ii. 30.]</note>eige vesa við es Hallbi&aolig;rn f&oeacute;re; þvi at hann grunaðe, at Hallgerðr <anchor id=a113.2>m&oelig;nde eige fara vilja með hónom. Oddr hafðe iamnan um b&oeacute;tt <anchor id=a113.3>með þeim. Þá es Hallbi&aolig;rn hafðe lagt á hesta þeirra, geck hann <anchor id=a113.4>í dyngjo; ok sat Hallgerðr á palle, ok kembðe ser; háret fell um <anchor id=a113.5>hána alla ok á golfet.&mdash;Hon hefer kvenna bazt hærð vereð á<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a113.6>Íslande með Hallgerðe Lang-brók<note place=apparatus id=an113.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Snuinbroc, S.</note>. Hallbi&aolig;rn bað hána upp <anchor id=a113.7>standa ok fara; hón sat ok þagðe. Þá tók hann til hennar, ok <anchor id=a113.8>lyptisk hon ecke<note place=apparatus id=an113.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ecke]</ab> S; upp, Cd.</note>. Þrimr sinnom fór svá. Hallbi&aolig;rn nam stað <anchor id=a113.9>fyrer henne ok kvað:


<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a113.10>Olkarma lætr arma<hi>n</hi>, eik, etc.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
</lg>


<p n=26.3.2><anchor id=a113.11>Hann snaraðe háret of h&aolig;nd ser, ok vill kippa henne af pallenom; <anchor id=a113.12>en hón sat ok veiksk eige efter. Þá brá hann sverðe, ok hió af henne <anchor id=a113.13>h&aolig;foðet. Síðan geck hann út, ok reið braut. Þeir vóro fiórer<note place=apparatus id=an113.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fiórer]</ab> þrír, S.</note> <anchor id=a113.14>saman, ok h&aolig;fðo tvau klyfja-hross. Fátt vas manna heima. Þegar <anchor id=a113.15>vas sent at segja Odde. Oddr seger: &lsquo;Segið ér Snæbirne á Ceol-varar-st&aolig;ðom;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a113.16>en ecke mon ek efter þeim ríða.&rsquo; Snæbi&aolig;rn reið <anchor id=a113.17>efter þeim með tolfta mann. En es þeir Hallbi&aolig;rn siá efter-reið, <anchor id=a113.18>b&aoacute;ðo f&aolig;ro-nautar Hallbiarnar hann undan ríða; en hann vilde þat <anchor id=a113.19>eige. Þeir Snæbi&aolig;rn kómo efter þeim við hæðer þær, es nú heita <anchor id=a113.20>Hallbiarnar-v&aolig;rðor. Þeir Hallbi&aolig;rn fóro á hæðena ok v&aolig;rðosk<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a113.21>þaðan. Þar fello þrír<note place=apparatus id=an113.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þrír (iii)]</ab> S; iiij, Cd., see below.</note> menn af Snæbirne, en báðer f&aolig;ro-nautar <anchor id=a113.22>Hallbiarnar. Snæbi&aolig;rn hió þá fót af Hallbirne í ristar-lið; þá <anchor id=a114.1><pb id=pb114 n=114><note place=margin>[153: ii. 30.]</note>hnekðe hann á ena syðre hæð, ok vá þar enn tvá menn áðr hann <anchor id=a114.2>fell&mdash;því ero þriár v&aolig;rðor á þeirre hæð, en fimm á hinne. Síðan <anchor id=a114.3>fór Snæbi&aolig;rn aptr.<note place=apparatus id=an114.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Síðan ... aptr]</ab> add. S. Here a whole paragraph seems missing.</note>

<p n=26.4><anchor id=a114.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> ...Snæbi&aolig;rn átte skip í Grímsár-óse; ok keypte halft, <anchor id=a114.5>Hrólfr enn Rauðsenzke: þeir vóro tolf hvárir. Með Snæbirne vóro<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a114.6>þeir Þorkell (ok) Sumarliðe syner Þórgeirs Rauðs, Einars sonar <anchor id=a114.7>Stafhyltings. Snæbi&aolig;rn tók við Þórodde or Þingnese, fóstra sínom, <anchor id=a114.8>ok kono hans; en Hrólfr tók við Styrbirne, es þetta kvað efter <anchor id=a114.9>draum sínn:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a114.10>Bana sé-ek ockarn, beggja tveggja,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a114.11>Allt amorlegt út-norðr í haf:
    <l><anchor id=a114.12>Frost ok kulða, feikn hvers-konar,
    <l><anchor id=a114.13>Si&aoacute;mk af svikom<note place=apparatus id=an114.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Si&aoacute;mk af svikom]</ab> conject.; f&oelig;s mek af sliki, Cd.; se ek af sliku, S.</note> Snæbi&aolig;rn vegenn.
</lg>

<p n=26.4.1><anchor id=a114.14>Þeir fóro at leita Gunnbiarnar-skerja, ok fundo land. Eige vilde <anchor id=a114.15>Snæbi&aolig;rn kanna láta um nóttena. Styrbi&aolig;rn fór af skipe, ok fann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a114.16>fé-sióð í kum<hi>b</hi>le, ok leynðe. Snæbi&aolig;rn laust hann með &oelig;xe; þá <anchor id=a114.17>fell sióðrenn niðr. Þeir g&oelig;rðo skála, ok lagðe hann í f&aolig;nn. <anchor id=a114.18>Þorkell Rauðs son fann at vatn vas á forke es út stóð í skála-gluggenn. <anchor id=a114.19>Þat vas um G&oelig;<note place=apparatus id=an114.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>G&oelig;]</ab> gie, Cd.</note>. Þá grófo þeir sik út. Snæbi&aolig;rn g&oelig;rðe <anchor id=a115.1><pb id=pb115 n=115><note place=margin>[154: ii. 31.]</note>at skipe; en þau Þóroddr vóro at skála af hans hende; en þeir <anchor id=a115.2>Styrbi&aolig;rn af hende Hrólfs<note place=apparatus id=an115.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> af hans hende Rolfs, Cd.</note>; en aðrer fóro at veiðom. Styrbi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a115.3>vá Þórodd; en þeir Hrólfr báðer Snæbi&aolig;rn. Rauðs-syner ok aller <anchor id=a115.4>aðrer sóro eiða til lífs sér.

<p n=26.4.2><anchor id=a115.5>Þeir tóko Háloga-land, ok fóro þaðan til Íslannz, ok kómo í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a115.6>Vaðel. Þorkell Trefill gat sem faret hafðe fyrer Rauðs-sonom. <anchor id=a115.7>Hrólfr g&oelig;rðe virke á Strandar-heiðe. Þorkell Trefill sende <anchor id=a115.8>Sveinung til h&aolig;fuðs Hrólfe: fór hann fyrst á Mýre til Her&shy;mundar; <anchor id=a115.9>þá til Óláfs at Dr&aolig;ngom; þá til Gestz í Haga; hann <anchor id=a115.10>sende hann til Hrólfs vinar síns. Sveinungr vá Hrólf ok Styr&shy;bi&aolig;rn:<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a115.11>þá fór hann í Haga. Gestr skifte við hann sverðe ok &oelig;xe, <anchor id=a115.12>ok feck hónom hesta tvá, <hi>h</hi>nockótta<note place=apparatus id=an115.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> hnauckotta, S.</note>, ok lét mann ríða um Vaðel, <anchor id=a115.13>ok allt í Kolla-fi&aolig;rð: hann sende Þorbi&aolig;rn enn Sterka at heimta <anchor id=a115.14>hestana; Þórbi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an115.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þorb.]</ab> S; hann, Cd.</note> vá hann á Sveinungs-eyre, því at sverðet Sveinungs <anchor id=a115.15>brotnaðe under hi&aolig;ltonom. Því h&oeacute;ldesk Trefill við Gest, þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a115.16>es saman vas iamnat vite þeirra, at hann hefðe því komet á Gest, <anchor id=a115.17>at hann sende sialfr mann til h&aolig;fuðs vin sínom.

<p n=26.5><anchor id=a115.18><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Óláfr Iamna-collr nam land frá Langa-dals-&aoacute; til Sandeyrar-ár, <anchor id=a115.19>ok bió í Unaðs-dale; hann átte Þóríðe<note place=apparatus id=an115.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þóríðe]</ab> Þóru, S.</note> Gunnsteins dóttor: þeirra <anchor id=a115.20>son Grímolfr, es átte Védíse, systor Vébiarnar<note place=apparatus id=an115.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>systor V.]</ab> add. S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=26.6><anchor id=a115.21><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórolfr<note place=apparatus id=an115.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Þórhrolfr, S.</note> Fasthalde hét maðr ágætr í Sogne. Hann varð úsáttr <anchor id=a116.1><pb id=pb116 n=116><note place=margin>[156: ii. 31]</note>við Hákon iarl Griótgarðz son, ok fór hann til Íslannz<note place=apparatus id=an116.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Íslannz]</ab> með ráðe Harallz konungs, add. S.</note>; ok nam <anchor id=a116.2>hann land frá Sandeyrar-&aoacute; til Gy<hi>g</hi>jar-spors-ár í Hrafns-firðe, ok <anchor id=a116.3>bió at Snæfi&aolig;llom. Hans son vas Ufeigr, faðer<note place=apparatus id=an116.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>faðer]</ab> es átte, S.</note> Otkotlo.


<p n=27.1><anchor id=a116.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>27.</hi> 1.</ab> &OElig;rlygr, son B&aolig;ðvars Vígsterks (sonar); hann fór <anchor id=a116.5>til Íslannz fyr ofríke Harallz konungs Hárfagra, ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a116.6>vas enn fyrsta vetr með Geirmunde Heljar-skinn. En um váret <anchor id=a116.7>gaf Geirmundr hónom bústað í Aðal-vík, ok l&aolig;nd þau sem þar <anchor id=a116.8>l&aoacute;go til. &OElig;rlygr átte Signýjo, dóttor Óblauðs, systor<note place=apparatus id=an116.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dóttor Ó., systor]</ab> S; H om. systor.</note> H&aolig;gna ens <anchor id=a116.9>Hvíta: þeirra son vas Cetill Gufa es átte Yre Geirmundar dóttor. <anchor id=a116.10>&OElig;rlygr eignaðesk Slétto ok Iokul-fiorðo.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=27.2><anchor id=a116.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Nú taka til land-n&aoacute;m Geirmundar<note place=apparatus id=an116.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Geirmundar]</ab> something is missing here. Nú ... Horn] add. S. es nú ero aim.] added by conject., ch. 17. 6 above.</note> [<hi>es nú ero almenningar</hi>], <anchor id=a116.12>sem fyrr es ritað, allt til Straum-ness fyr austan Horn.


<p n=28.1><anchor id=a116.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>28.</hi> 1.</ab> Hella-biorn, son Herfinnz ok H&aolig;llo, vas víkingr <anchor id=a116.14>mikill: hann vas iamnan úvin Harallz konungs. <anchor id=a116.15>Hann kom til Íslannz í Biarnar-fi&aolig;rð með alski&aolig;ldoðo skipe&mdash;síðan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a116.16>vas hann Skialda-Bi&aolig;rn kallaðr. Hann nam land frá <anchor id=a116.17>Straum-nese til Dranga: hann bió í Skialda-Biarnar-vík; en átte <anchor id=a116.18>annat bú í Biarnar-nese&mdash;þar sér miklar skála-tofter hans.&mdash;Son <anchor id=a116.19>hans vas Þórbi&aolig;rn, faðer Arngerðar, es átte Þióðrekr Sleito-Biarnar <anchor id=a116.20>son. Þeirra syner Þórbi&aolig;rn, ok Sturla, ok Þióðrekr.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb117 n=117><note place=margin>[157: ii. 32.]</note>

<p n=28.2><anchor id=a117.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Geirolfr hét maðr, es braut skip sítt við Geirolfs-gnúp: hann <anchor id=a117.2>bió síðan under gnúpenom at ráðe Biarnar.

<p n=28.3><anchor id=a117.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an117.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> This § is taken from S; om. H. Ásvallz son] a blank left for a name in S, but nothing is missing.</note>Þórvaldr Ásvallz son, Ulfs son, Yxna-Þóris sonar nam Dranga-land <anchor id=a117.4>ok Dranga-vík til Engi-ness, ok bió at Dr&aolig;ngom alla æve. <anchor id=a117.5>Hans son vas Eirikr Rauðe, es bygðe Gr&oelig;n<hi>a</hi>-land, sem fyrr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a117.6>seger.

<p n=28.4><anchor id=a117.7><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Herr&oelig;ðr Hvika-timbr<note place=apparatus id=an117.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Hvita-ský, S.</note> vas g&aolig;fogr maðr; hann vas drepenn <anchor id=a117.8>at r&aoacute;ðom Harallz konungs. En syner hans þrír fóro til Íslannz, <anchor id=a117.9>ok n&aoacute;mo land á Str&aolig;ndom: Eyvindr Eyvindar-fi&aolig;rð. Ófeigr <anchor id=a117.10>Ófeigs-fi&aolig;rð, en Ingolfr Ingolfs-fi&aolig;rð. Þar bioggo þeir síðan.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=28.5><anchor id=a117.11><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Eirikr Snara hét maðr, es land nam frá Ingolfs-firðe til <anchor id=a117.12>Veiðe-lauso, ok Trékyllis-vík. Hann átte Álofo dóttor Ingolfs or <anchor id=a117.13>Ingolfs-firðe. Þeirra son vas Flose, es bió í Vík þá es Austmenn <anchor id=a117.14>bruto þar skip sítt; ok g&oelig;rðo or hrænom<note place=apparatus id=an117.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hrænom]</ab> S; brotunom, H.</note> skip þat es þeir k&aolig;lloðo <anchor id=a117.15>Tré-kylli. Á því fór Flose útan, ok varð aftr-reka í &OElig;xar-fi&aolig;rð&mdash;þaðan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a117.16>af g&oelig;rðesk Saga B&aolig;ðmóðs Gerpis<note place=apparatus id=an117.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gerpis ok Grímolfs]</ab> add. S.</note> ok Grímolfs.


<p n=29.1><anchor id=a117.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>29.</hi> 1.</ab> Onundr Tréfótr, son Ufeigs Burlu-fótar, Ívars <anchor id=a117.18>sonar Beytils: Onundr vas á móti Harallde konunge <anchor id=a117.19>í Hafrs-firðe, ok lét þar fót sínn. Efter þat fór hann til Íslannz, <anchor id=a117.20>ok nam land frá Kleifom til Úf&oeacute;ro, Kallbaks-vík, Kolbeins-vík,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a118.1><pb id=pb118 n=118><note place=margin>[158: ii. 32.]</note>Byrgis-vík; ok bió í Kallbak til elle. Hann vas bróðer Goðbiargar, <anchor id=a118.2>móðor Goðbrannz Kúlo, f&aolig;ðor Ásto, móðor Óláfs konungs ens <anchor id=a118.3>Helga. Onundr átte feóra sono; einn vas Grettir: annarr Þorgeirr <anchor id=a118.4>Flosco-bak: þriðe Asgeirr Æðe-kollr, faðer Kalfs, ok Hrefno <anchor id=a118.5>es Ceartan átte; ok Þóríðar, es Þorkell Cugge átte, en síðarr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a118.6>Steinþórr Óláfs son<note place=apparatus id=an118.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Steinmóðr Olafsson, S.</note> Pá: enn fiórðe son Onundar vas Þórgrímr <anchor id=a118.7>Hæro-kollr, faðer Ásmundar, f&aolig;ðor Grettiss ens Sterka.

<p n=29.2><anchor id=a118.8><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Bi&aolig;rn hét maðr, es nam Biarnar-fi&aolig;rð; hann átte Liúfo. <anchor id=a118.9>Þeirra son vas Svanr at<note place=apparatus id=an118.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> aa, Cd. es þar bió ... at sýn] add. M&ast;.</note> Svans-hóle, es þar bió síðan ok drucknaðe <anchor id=a118.10>á firðenom, ok geck þar inn í fiallet at sýn.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=29.3><anchor id=a118.11><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Steingrímr Trolle<note place=apparatus id=an118.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Trolle]</ab> add. by conj.</note> nam Steingríms-fi&aolig;rð allan, ok bió í Trolla-tungo. <anchor id=a118.12>Hans son vas Þórer, faðer Halldórs, f&aolig;ðor Þorvallz Orgoða, <anchor id=a118.13>f&aolig;ðor Bitro-Odda, f&aolig;ðor Oddz <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Há-Snorra, f. Oddz munks, ok <anchor id=a118.14>Þorláks ok Þorarens Rosta<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.<note place=apparatus id=an118.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Þorhrolfs ok Þór. Tosta (better?), S.</note>

<p n=29.4><anchor id=a118.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Colle hét maðr, es nam Colla-fi&aolig;rð, ok Skriðins-enne; ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a118.16>bió under Felle meðan hann lifðe.

<p n=29.5><anchor id=a118.17><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórbi&aolig;rn Bitra hét maðr; ok vas mikill víkingr ok ill-menne; <anchor id=a118.18>hann fór til Íslannz með skullda-lið sítt. Hann nam fi&aolig;rð þann <anchor id=a118.19>es nú heiter Bitra, ok bió þar. Nockoro síðarr braut Goðlaugr, <anchor id=a118.20>bróðer Gils<note place=apparatus id=an118.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Gisl, S.</note> Skeiðar-nefs, skip sítt þar út við h&aolig;fða þann es nú<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a118.21>heiter Goðlaugs-h&aolig;fðe. Goðlaugr komsk<note place=apparatus id=an118.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> kom, Cd.; komz, S.</note> á land, ok kona hans <anchor id=a119.1><pb id=pb119 n=119><note place=margin>[159: ii. 33.]</note>ok dótter; en aðrer menn aller týndosk. Þá kom til Þórbi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a119.2>Bitra ok myrðe þau bæðe; en tók meyna ok f&oeacute;dde upp. En es <anchor id=a119.3>þessa varð varr Gils Skeiðar-nef, fór hann til ok hefnde bróðor <anchor id=a119.4>síns, ok drap Þórbi&aolig;rn Bitro, ok enn fleire menn aðra.&mdash;Við Goðlaug <anchor id=a119.5>es kend Goðlaugs-vík.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<p n=30.1><anchor id=a119.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>30.</hi> 1.</ab> Balke hét maðr, son Bl&oelig;ings, Sóta sonar. Hann <anchor id=a119.7>fór til Íslannz fyr ofríke Harallz konungs<note place=apparatus id=an119.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> S; Klæings, Cd. Hann var á mót Haralde konunge í Hafrs-firðe; efter þat fór hann til Ísl. ok nam, S.</note>, ok nam <anchor id=a119.8>Hrúta-fi&aolig;rð allan, ok bió á Balka-st&aolig;ðom hv&aoacute;rom-tveggjom; ok <anchor id=a119.9>síðarst í B&oeacute;, ok dó þar. Hans son vas Berse Goðlauss, es fyrst <anchor id=a119.10>bió á Bersa-st&aolig;ðom í Hrúta-firðe; en síðan nam hann Langa-vatz-dal,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a119.11>sem fyrr es ritið<note place=apparatus id=an119.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sem fyrr es ritið]</ab> (II. 4. 3) om. S, putting instead the clause, en síðan nam ... Gamla.</note>, ok átte þar annat bú, áðr hann feck <anchor id=a119.12>Þórdísar dóttor Þórhaddz or Hitár-dale, ok tók með Holms-land. <anchor id=a119.13>Þeirra son vas Arngeirr, faðer Biarnar Hitd&oeacute;la-kappa. Geirbi&aolig;rg <anchor id=a119.14>vas dótter Balka, móðer Véleifs ens Gamla.

<p n=30.2><anchor id=a119.15><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Arndís en Auðga, dótter Steinolfs ens Lága, nam síðan land<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a119.16>í Hrúta-firðe, út frá Borð-eyre. Hon bió í B&oeacute;: hennar son vas <anchor id=a119.17>Þórðr es bió fyrr í Múla í Saur-b&oeacute;.

<p n=30.3><anchor id=a119.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Greniaðr<note place=apparatus id=an119.3><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Greniuðr, S. Hokins, S.</note> ok Þrostr, syner Hermunder Holkins, n&aoacute;mo land í <anchor id=a119.19>Hrúta-firðe, inn frá Borð-eyre, ok bioggo at Melom. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Frá Gren-jaðe <anchor id=a119.20>vas komenn Hesta-Geller prestr, en Ormr frá Þreste.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an119.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Frá Gren ... frá Þreste]</ab> add. S.</note> Sonr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a119.21>Þrastar vas Þórkell á Cers-eyre, faðer Goðrúnar, es átte Þórbi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a120.1><pb id=pb120 n=120><note place=margin>[161: ii. 33.]</note>Þynna, son Hrómundar Hallta. Þeir bioggo at Fagra-brecko. <anchor id=a120.2>Þórleifr Hrómundar-fóstre vas son þeirra. Hásteinn hét enn<note place=apparatus id=an120.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>enn]</ab> add. S.</note> son <anchor id=a120.3>Hrómundar, þeir vóro aller um eitt ráð. Þórer hét son Þórkels<note place=apparatus id=an120.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórkels]</ab> S; Þoris, Cd. (badly).</note> <anchor id=a120.4>Þrastar sonar: hann bió at Melom: Helga hét dótter hans.

<p n=30.4><anchor id=a120.5><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Í þenna tíma kom Sleito-Helge út á Borð-eyre, ok Iorundr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a120.6>bróðer hans. Þeir vóro víkingar; þeir fóro aller til Mela; tolf <anchor id=a120.7>vóro þeir, útan sveinar. Þá feck Helge Helgo Þóris dóttor. Þeim <anchor id=a120.8>Hrómunde hurfo stóð-hross: þat kendo þeir þeim Helga, ok <anchor id=a120.9>stemnde Miðfiarðar-Skegge þeim um stulð til Alþingiss; en þeir <anchor id=a120.10>Hrómundr skyldr gæta héraðs, ok h&aolig;fðo virke gótt á Brecko.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a120.11>Austmenn bioggo skip sítt.

<p n=30.4.1><anchor id=a120.12>Þat vas einn morgin at hrafn kom á lióra á Brecko, ok gall hátt. <anchor id=a120.13>Þá kvað Hrómundr:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a120.14>Út heyr-ek svan sveita....
</lg>

<p n=30.4.3><anchor id=a120.15>Þórbi&aolig;rn kvað:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a120.16>Hlackar hagle....
</lg>

<p n=30.4.5><anchor id=a120.17>Í þenna tíma kómo Austmenn í virket; þvi at verkmenn h&aolig;fðo eige <anchor id=a120.18>aftr láteð. Þeir br&oeacute;ðr gengo út. Konor s&aolig;gðo Hrómund of <anchor id=a120.19>gamlan, en Þórleif of ungan at ganga út&mdash;hann vas xix<note place=apparatus id=an120.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> xv, S (better).</note> vetra. <anchor id=a120.20>Hann hlióp út ok Þórleifr með v&aoacute;pnom sínom ok kvað:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb121 n=121><note place=margin>[163: ii. 33.]</note>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a121.1>Vara mer í dag dauðe ...
</lg>

<p n=30.4.7><anchor id=a121.2>Austmenn fello sex í virkeno, en aðrer sex<note place=apparatus id=an121.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>aðrer sex]</ab> aðrer &mmacr; (vi), Cd.</note> stucko í braut. En þá <anchor id=a121.3>es Þórbi&aolig;rn vilde loka aftr virket, skaut Iorundr atgeir í gegnom <anchor id=a121.4>hann. Þórbi&aolig;rn tók atgeir ór sáreno, ok sette miðle herða <anchor id=a121.5>Iorunde, sva at út kom um briósteð; ok fello þeir báðer dauðer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a121.6>á i&aolig;rð. Helge greip upp I&aolig;rund, ok kastaðe hónom á bak ser, <anchor id=a121.7>ok rann svá. Hásteinn rann efter þeim þar til es Helge kastaðe <anchor id=a121.8>hónom af bake sér; þá hvarf hann aftr. Hrómundr vas fallenn, <anchor id=a121.9>en Þórleifr vas sárr til ólífis. Konor spurðo tíðenda. Hásteinn <anchor id=a121.10>kvað:<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a121.11>Her hafa sex þeir es sæfask....
</lg>

<p n=30.4.9><anchor id=a121.12>Konor spurðo hve marger þeir være. Hásteinn kvað:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a121.13>Varka ek fúrs með fleire, etc.
</lg>

<p n=30.4.11><anchor id=a121.14>Konor spurðo, hverso marger fallner være af víkingom. Hásteinn <anchor id=a121.15>kvað:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a121.16>Siau hafa sæki tívar ...<note place=apparatus id=an121.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tívar ... ]</ab> two strophes, to which S adds four (all manufactured stuff).</note>
    <l><anchor id=a121.17>Her mego h&oelig;le-borvar ...
</lg>

<p n=30.4.13><anchor id=a121.18>Þeir Helge l&aolig;gðo út enn sama dag, ok týndosk aller á Helga-skere <anchor id=a121.19>fyr Skriðins-enne. Þórleifr vas gr&oeacute;ddr, ok bió at Brecko, <anchor id=a122.1><pb id=pb122 n=122><note place=margin>[167: iii. 1.]</note>en Hásteinn fór útan ok fell á Ormenom Langa með Oláfe konunge <anchor id=a122.2>Tryggva syne.

<p n=30.5><anchor id=a122.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an122.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> S adds this paragraph; om. H.</note>Nú ero ritoð land-n&aoacute;m flest í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge, epter <anchor id=a122.4>því sem fróðer menn hafa sagt. Má þat nú heyra, at þann <anchor id=a122.5>fiórðung hefer mart stór-menne byggt, ok frá þeim ero margar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a122.6>g&aolig;fgar ætter komnar, sem nú mátte heyra.

</div3>


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb44a n=44>
<div3 id=en.lib2 n=II lang=en-UK type=Book rend="display(none)">
<!-- LIB. II. -->


<p n=0.1>Here beginneth the Settlement of the West-frith-men&apos;s Quarter, which was largely settled by men of birth.


<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a man whose name was <hi rend=sc>Calman</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Colman</hi>, a Southrey-man [by kin]. He went to Iceland, and came to Whale-frith, and abode by Colman&apos;s river through the winter. Two of his sons were drowned in Whale-frith, and afterwards he took land in settlement to the west of White-river, between it and the Fleet, all Colman&apos;s-tongue, and so all eastward under Iockle as far as the grass grows; and he dwelt at Colman&apos;s-tongue. He was drowned in White-water as he was going south on to the lava or rawn to visit his leman, and his howe is on the White-water bank on the south. His son was Sturla gode, who first dwelt at Sturla-stead under Tongue-fell upwards from Scald-skelm&apos;s-dale, but afterwards he dwelt at Colman&apos;s-tongue. His son was Bearne, who had a feud with Hrod-wolf the Younger and his son about Little-tongue. Then Bearne made a vow to take Christendom, and after that the White-water broke out a new bed, which it now runs in. Thus Bearne came to own Little-tongue down past Grind and Solmund&apos;s-head.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cylan</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Culan</hi> was the name of Colman&apos;s brother. He dwelt beneath Coll&apos;s-hammer. His son was Care, who had a feud with Carle Conalsson of Carle-stead, the freedman of Hrod-wolf of Goat-land, about an ox; and it turned out so that Carle got the ox. Then Care egged on his thrall to slay Carle. The thrall pretended that he was <pb id=pb45a n=45>mad, and ran off south over the lava <hi>or</hi> rawn. Carle was sitting on his threshold, and the thrall hewed him his death-blow, and afterwards Care slew the thrall. Theod-wolf the son of Carle slew Cylan the son of Care in Cylan&apos;s-holm; and after Theod-wolf burnt Care in his house at the place that is now called the Burning. Bearne Sturla&apos;s son was baptized and dwelt at Bearne-stead in Little-tongue, and had a church built there.


<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Throw-end Nefia</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Nebia</hi> was the name of a nobleman, the father of Thor-stan, who had to wife Lopt-hen, daughter of Arne-beorn, herse <hi>or</hi> lord of Friths. The sister of Lopt-hen was Arn-thrud, whom Thore herse, the son of Hrod-wald, had to wife; and their son was Aren-beorn. The mother of Arn-thrud was Anstrid Sl&oelig;ki-dreng, daughter of Brage the poet, and of Lopt-hen, the daughter of Erp Lutandi [Yrp]. The son of Thor-stan and Lopt-hen was <hi rend=sc>Horse-kell</hi>, who had to wife Io-reid, the daughter of Alwe, the son of Fin, the son of Möttol the king. Their son was named Hall-kell.

<p n=2.1.1>Hross-kell <hi>or</hi> Horse-kell went to Iceland and came into Ground-frith, and dwelt first at Acre-ness; then Cetil and his brother would not have him as neighbour; and afterwards he took in settlement White-water-side, between Ciar-water and the Fleet. He dwelt at Hall-kell&apos;s-stead, and Hall-kell his son after him, and had to wife Thurid Dylla, daughter of Gund-laug of Thwart-water-lithe and of We-laug, Aurlyg&apos;s daughter from Esia-rock.

<p n=2.1.2>Their children (Hall-kell&apos;s and Thurid&apos;s) were these: Thor-arin and Fin-ward, Tind, and Illugi the Black, and Grima, whom Thorgils, <pb id=pb46a n=46>Are&apos;s son, had to wife. Thor-arin slew Mouse Balework in fight, when he was dwelling in Rawn&apos;s-ridge. He built him a work <hi>or</hi> fort there, and led White-water through the bank-shelf; but before this she used to run down Mell-rack-dale <hi>or</hi> Sand-fox-dale. Illugi and Tind attacked Balework in his work.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Horse-kell gave land to Throw-end, the father of Smith-cell [Cathal Dubh], the father of these, Thor-arin and Ead-win, who were the leaders of the <hi rend=sc>Cave-men</hi>. He dwelt at Thor-wald-stead, and owned all Fleets-dale up to the Fleet.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Horse-kell gave Thor-gaut, his shipmate, land down in Side. He dwelt at Thor-gaut&apos;s-stead. His sons were <corr sic=these resp=errata>the</corr> two Gislis.

<p n=2.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Osbeorn the Wealthy</hi>, the son of Haurd, bought land south of Cear-water up in Sledge-brook to Nit-berg <hi>or</hi> Knit-rock. He dwelt at Osbeorn-stead. He had to wife Thor-borg, daughter of Mid-frith Sceg. Their daughter was Inge-borg, whom Illugi the Black had to wife.

<p n=2.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arn-wolf</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Erne-wolf</hi> was the name of a man who took in settlement Arn-wolf&apos;s-dale and Cear-dale northward up to Nit-berg. Cetil Blund [Cathal B....] bought land off Arn-wolf, all north of Cliff, and dwelt in Arn-wolf&apos;s-dale. Then Arn-wolf built a homestead up in Cear-dale, at the place now called Arn-wolf&apos;s-stead. Above Cliff it is called Cear-dale, because there were brushwood and small shaws between Cear-water and Thwart-water, so that it could not be dwelt in. Blund-Cetil was a very wealthy man; he had the wood cleared far and wide, and took up his abode there.

<p>[M: Double Text.] Arn-wolf took for settlement the whole North-tongue <pb id=pb47a n=47>between Cear-water and Cross-water, and dwelt at Ern-wolf&apos;s-dale. His son was Blund-Cetil, the father of Thor-kell, whom Hen-thori burnt in his house, whence came the feud between Thord Gelle [Gilla] and Ord o&apos; Tongue. [Here the double text ends.]


<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-mund</hi> was the name of a man, the brother of Grim the Haleygoman. He came with his ship into White-river. He took in settlement Thwart-water-dale and Thwart-water-lithe <hi>or</hi> slope down to Hall-mull and forth to Thwart-water. He dwelt in Hrod-mund-stead, at the place which is now called Call&apos;s-brink. His son was Gund-laug Worm-tongue, who dwelt at Gund-laugs-stead, to the south of Thwart-water. He had to wife We-laug, as was before written.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hagene</hi> was the name of a shipmate of Hrod-munds. He dwelt at Hagene&apos;s-stead. His son was Helgi of Helge&apos;s-mere, the father of Arn-grim <hi>gode</hi>, who was at Blund-Cetil&apos;s Burning. Hagene was the brother of Fier the Wealthy.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Is-laf</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Is-red</hi>, brethren, took land in settlement down from Sledge-beck, between Arn-wolf&apos;s-dale-water and White-water, the upper land down to Red&apos;s-beck, and the southern land down to Haurd&apos;s-hillock. Is-laf dwelt at Is-laf&apos;s-stead, but Is-red at Is-red-stead, and he owned the land southerly along the White-water. He was the father of Thor-beorn, the father of Liot o&apos; Walls, who fell in the Fight o&apos; the Heath.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>As-gar</hi> was the name of a shipmate of Hrod-mund&apos;s, that dwelt at Hammer, up from Helge&apos;s-mere. He had to wife Hilda Star, daughter of Thor-wald, son of Thor-grim Br&oelig;ci. Their sons were these: Stan-beorn, <hi>surnamed</hi> the Strong and the Hard-hitter, and Thor-ward, the <pb id=pb48a n=48>father of Maefa [Meabh], whom Rifla <hi>or</hi> Hrifla had to wife, and Thor-stan the third, the fourth Helge, the father of Thord, the father of poet Helge.

<p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arn-borg</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Erne-borg</hi> was the name of a woman. She dwelt at Arn-berg-beck. Her sons were these: Eld-grim, that dwelt at Halse <hi>or</hi> Neck, up from Arn-borg-beck at Eld-grim&apos;s-stead; and Thor-gest, who got his death-wound when he and Hrane fought a battle at the place which is now called Hrane&apos;s-fall.

<p n=3.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thorwen</hi> dwelt in Thorunn&apos;s-holt. She had land down to Wood-beck and up over against that of Thurid Spae-queen, her sister, that dwelt at Grave <hi>or</hi> Pit. After her Thorwen-pool in Thwart-water is named, and from her are the <hi>Hammer-biders</hi> come.

<p n=3.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn</hi>, son of Arn-beorn, the son of Aulaf Long-halse <hi>or</hi> Long-neck; he was the brother of Lyting of Weapon-frith. Thor-beorn took in settlement Staf-holts-tongue, between North-water and Thwart-water. He dwelt at Erne-holt. His son was Tait of Staf-holt, the father of Einar, and of Thor-wald, the father of Thor-ketla, whom Hyrning, Clepp-iron&apos;s son, had to wife.

<p n=3.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Blese</hi> took land in settlement in North-dale on the south, up from Croke, and all Cave-dale, and dwelt at Blesi-stead. His son was Gisle of Mell [Downs] in Cave-dale. After him Gisle-mere was named. Another son of Blese was Thor-fin of Thor-fin&apos;s-stead, father of Thor-gerd Heath-widow, mother of Thord Erra, father of Thor-gerd, mother of Helge of Lund [Grove].

<pb id=pb49a n=49><p n=3.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-mund</hi>, the son of Gund-beorn Gand [wand], took in settlement the Tongue, between North-water and Sand-water, and dwelt at Tongue. His son was Brune, father of Thor-beorn of Stone, who fell in the Fight o&apos; the Heath.

<p n=3.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Erne the Old</hi> took in settlement Sand-dale and Narrow-dale, and also North-water-dale, down from Croke to Erne&apos;s-boll, and dwelt at Harec-stead.

<p n=3.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Red-beorn</hi> took in settlement Beorn-dale, and the dale that goes out of it, and he had one homestead down under Mell-fell-gil, and a second down below in the county, as it is written.

<p>[Double text.] Beorn was the name of a Northern man [Norwegian] that came out late in the time of the settlement; and took in settlement North-water-dale, north of North-water, and all Beorn&apos;s-dale, and the dales that lead out of it. He dwelt at Dale-mouth. He was the first man to forge iron-ore in Iceland, and therefore he was called Red-ore Beorn. [Here the double text ends.]

<p n=3.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Carle</hi> took in settlement Carle&apos;s-dale up above Hred-mere [MS. Helga-mere], and dwelt under Carle&apos;s-fell, and owned the land down to Even-scard marching with Grim&apos;s land.


<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf</hi> was the name of a man that dwelt in Neams-dale. He was the son of Wolf that was called Queld-wolf [i. e. Evening-wolf, <hi>or</hi> Were-wolf]. Grim was the name of Wolf&apos;s second son. King Harold Fairhair had Thor-wolf slain, and paid no were-gild withal; but <pb id=pb50a n=50>Grim avenged this, and then went to Iceland. But Wolf died at sea. Scald-Grim [Grim the Bald] came in his ship into Gowe-water-oyce, and took land between North-water and Heat-water, all that lieth between fell and foreshore, and abode at Borg. He had to wife Bera, daughter of Ingw-here. The sons of her and Scald-Grim were these: Thor-wolf and Egil. These brothers both had to wife As-gerd, the daughter of Beorn [Egil took to wife his brother&apos;s widow], and Thor-wolf&apos;s daughter was Thor-dis, whom Grim o&apos; Mossfell had to wife. Thor-wolf fell at Win-heath in England [Brunanburh fight] in battle; but Egil went to Iceland and abode at Borg, and his kinsmen [after him] a long time. <hi>This is the original text of Are. The former account of this family in Book I.</hi> 8 <hi>is the work of a later editor of the Sturlung time</hi>.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gris</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Grim</hi> were the names of freedmen of Scald-Grim. He gave them land up on the fell, to Gris Gris-tongue and to Grim Grims-dale.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Balce</hi>, the son of Bloing, the son of Sote of Sote-ness. He fought against king Harold at Hafrs-frith. He came out to Iceland, and took in settlement all Ram-frith, and dwelt at By. His son was Berse godlease, who took in settlement Lang-mere-dale, and dwelt at Torf-whale-stead; his sister was Gar-borg, whom Thor-gar Mel-dun [Maelduine] of Tongue-fell had to wife. Their son [was] We-laf the Old, father of Battle-Wager-o&apos;-Berse. Berse godlease had to wife Thor-dis, daughter of Thor-ord of Hot-river-dale, and there came with her from home [as her marriage portion] Holms-land, and he dwelt there afterwards. Their son was Arn-gar, who had to wife Thur-id, the daughter of Thor-fin the Strong. Their son was Beorn, <pb id=pb51a n=51>the champion of Hot-river-dale. The mother of Thur-rid was Se-unn <hi>or</hi> Sea-wen, daughter of Scald-Grim.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sig-mund</hi> was the name of a freedman of Scald-Grim. He gave him land between Gliuf-water and North-water. He dwelt at Howe before he moved to Munod-ness [Joy-ness]. After him Sig-mund-ness was called.

<p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Red-Beorn</hi> bought land of Scald-Grim between Gliuf-water [Cañon-river <hi>or</hi> Chine-river] and Gowe-water [Smith-river]. He dwelt at Red-Beorn&apos;s-stead up above Eski-holt. His son was Thor-kell Trefil of Scard and Helgi o&apos; Hwam in North-dale; and he is howed <hi>or</hi> laid in barrow there, and Gund-wald, the father of Thor-kell, who had to wife Helga, daughter of Thor-gar of Willow-mere.

<p n=4.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> To <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Crum</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Thori-beigalldi</hi>, brethren, Scald-Grim gave land beyond Gowe-water. Thor-beorn dwelt at Crum-hills, but Thore at Beigallde.

<p n=4.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> To <hi rend=sc>Thord the Giant</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Thor-gar Earth-long</hi>, and <hi rend=sc>Thor-berg Stang</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Pole</hi>, their sister, Scald-Grim gave land above Eincunn, out alongside Lang-water. Thord dwelt at Giant-stead, and Thor-gar at Earth-long-stead, and Thor-berg at Stangs-holt.

<p n=4.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ane</hi> was the name of a man to whom Grim gave land between Lang-water and Hafs-beck. He dwelt at Ane&apos;s-brink. His son was Ean-wend Seone, father of Stan-here and Dolla, the mother of Cormac.

<p n=4.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Grim-wolf</hi> abode first at Grim-wolf-stead.  Grim&apos;s-fit and <pb id=pb52a n=52>Grim-wolf-beck take their names from him. His son was named Grim, who dwelt south of the frith. His son was Grim-here, who dwelt at Grim-here-stead. Thor-stan and Ord o&apos; Tongue had a feud with him.

<p n=4.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Grane</hi> dwelt at Grane-stead in <corr sic=Beg-ness resp=errata>Big-ness</corr>.

<p n=4.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-finn the Strong</hi> was the name of the standard-bearer of Thor-wolf, Scald-Grim&apos;s son [brother?].  To him Scald-Grim gave Sea-unn, his daughter, and land outside Lang-water, to Lear-becks and up to the Fell, and [out] to Elfet&apos;s-river. He dwelt at Force-water. Their daughter was Thor-dis, the mother of Beorn, the Hot-dale champion.

<p n=4.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Yngw-here</hi> was the name of a man, who was the father of Bera, whom Scald-Grim had to wife. To him Grim gave land between Lear-becks and Stream-frith. He dwelt at Elfets-ness. Another daughter of his was Thor-dis, whom Thor-gar Lambh of Lamb-stead had to wife, the father of Thord, whom the thralls of Cathal Gowe [smith] burnt in his house. Thord&apos;s son was Lambh the Strong.

<p n=4.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Stan-wolf</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement both Rawn-dales, all between Elfet-river and Hot-river, and up to Grit, by leave of Scald-Grim, and dwelt at South Rawn-dale. His son was Thor-laf, from whom the <hi rend=sc>Rawn-dale-men</hi> are come. Thor-unn was the name of Stan-wolf&apos;s daughter, whom Thor-beorn, Weevil&apos;s son, had to wife. [He was] the father of Thor-gerd, the mother of Os-mund, the father of Swegen-beorn, the father of Ord, the father of Gro [Gruoch], the mother of Ord of Elfets-ness.

<pb id=pb53a n=53><p n=4.14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-hard</hi> was the name of a nobleman, the son of Stan the great sailor, the son of Wig-beoth [Ui-beth], the son of Beadmod of Bulk-room. He took in settlement all Hot-river-dale down to Grit-water, southward<corr resp=errata>,</corr> and northward all between Hot-river and Cold-river to the sea. His son was Thor-gar, the father of Haf-thor, the father of Gud-ny, the mother of Thor-lac the Wealthy. Thor-gar&apos;s sons were these: Grim of Scard, and Thor-arin, Fin-bow, Ey-stan, Gest and Torve.

<p n=4.15><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-gils Knop</hi>, a freedman of Coll Hrod-waldsson, took in settlement Knop-dale. His sons were these: Ing-iald, Thor-arin, and Thore, that dwelt at Acres, and owned all the land between Hot-river and Elfet-river, and marching with the land of Stan-wolf. Thori&apos;s [Thor-arin&apos;s] son was Thro-wend, who had to wife Stan-unn, the daughter of Ram of Comb-ness. Their sons were Thori and [blank in S], Scum, the father of Torve, the father of Tann [Tadg]. His son was Ram, who had to wife Col-finna, the daughter of Illuge the Swarthy.

<p n=4.15.1>Now are told up the men who took up their abode in the settlement of Scald-Grim.


<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a man whose name was <hi rend=sc>Grim</hi>, the son of Ing-iald, the son of Rod-wald, of Hardings-dale, the brother of Asi herse. He went to Iceland to seek for land, and sailed to the north of the country. He was through the winter in Grimsey on Stan-grims-frith. Berg-dis was the name of his wife, and Thore was his son.

<pb id=pb54a n=54><p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Grim used to row out to fish in the winter [S: harvest-tide] with his thralls, and his son used to be with him; and when the boy began to grow cold, they wrapped him in a seal-skin bag, and pulled it up to his  neck. Grim pulled up a merman. [And when he came up] Grim said, &lsquo;Do thou tell us our life and how long we shall live, or else thou shalt never see thy home again.&rsquo; &lsquo;It is of little worth to you to know this [answers he], though it is to the boy in the seal-skin bag, for thou shalt be dead ere the spring come, but thy son shall take up his abode and take land in settlement where thy mare Scalm shall lie down under the pack.&rsquo; They got no more words out of him. But later in the winter Grim died, and he is howed there. [S: Later in that winter Grim and his men, all but the boy, went a fishing, and were all drowned.]

<p n=5.2.1>Berg-dis and Thore went in the spring out of Grimsey westward over the Heath to Broad-frith. Scalm [the mare] went forth all the summer and never lay down. The next winter they stayed at Scalm&apos;s-ness in Broad-frith; but the summer after they turned southward, and Scalm went on till they came off the Heath south to Borg-frith, where two red sand-downs were, and there she lay under the pack below the outermost sand-mell. There Thore took land in settlement, south of Gnup-water to Cold-river, below Knop-dale, all between fell and foreshore. He dwelt at the outer Red-mell.

<p n=5.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Thore was old and blind when he came out of doors one evening, and saw a man rowing into Cold-river-mouth in an <corr sic=open>iron</corr> boat; great and <pb id=pb55a n=55>wicked-looking he was, and he walked ashore up to the homestead that is called Rip, and dug a fort there in the slope by the fold-gate. And that night there came up fire out of the earth, and burnt the Borg-lava. There was a homestead there then where the lava-mound now is.

<p n=5.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> A son of Seal-Thore was Thor-finn, who had to wife Io-frid, the daughter of Ord o&apos; Tongue. Their sons were these: Thor-kell and Thor-gils, Stan and Galte, Orm <hi>or</hi> Worm, and Thor-orm, and Thore.

<p n=5.4.1>Thor-finn&apos;s daughter was Thor-rid [S: Thor-borg], whom Thor-brand of Elfets-frith had to wife.

<p n=5.4.2>Seal-Thore&apos;s kinsmen, those of them that were heathens, died into [went after death into] Thore&apos;s-berg.

<p n=5.4.3>Thor-gils and Thor-kell, the sons of Thor-finn, both had to wife Unn <hi>or</hi> Wen, the daughter of Alf-a-Dale. Scalm died at Scalm-well.

<p n=5.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Colban Clack-head</hi>, the son of Atle of Atley in Fiolom, went to Iceland, and bought land, all between Cold-river and Hot-river, down off Sand-brink, and dwelt at Colban-stead. His son was Fin-bow of Fair-shaw, and Thord the poet.

<p n=5.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-mod gode</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Thord gnupa</hi>, the sons of Odd Rank, the son of Thor-wid, the son of Frey-wid, the son of Alf of Vors. These brethren went to Iceland, and took in settlement the land between Lax-water and Stream-frith-river. Thord had Gnup-dale and dwelt there, and his son Scofte after him. He was the father of Heor-Leif the <hi>gode</hi>, and Finna whom Ref [Fox] the Big had to wife. Their son [was] Dalc [Dealg], the father of Stan-unn <hi>or</hi> Stan-wen, the mother of poet Ref.

<pb id=pb56a n=56><p n=5.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Thor-mod dwelt in Red-Coll-stead, and was called Thor-mod the Gode, and he had to wife Gerd, daughter of Ceallac the Old. Their son was Gud-laug <hi>or</hi> Gudh-laug the Wealthy. He had to wife Thor-dis, daughter of Swart-head [Ceann Dubh], the son of Beorn Gold-bearer, and of Thor-rid, daughter of Ord o&apos; Tongue, who then dwelt at Harrow-holt. Gud-laug the Wealthy saw that Red-mells-land was better than any other land in the country round, so he challenged Thor-finn for his land, and called him to the holm [to wager of battle]. They were both <corr sic="for fighting on" resp=errata>disabled in</corr> the battle, but Thor-rid, daughter of Ord o&apos; Tongue, <corr sic="parted">healed</corr> them, and set them at peace together.

<p n=5.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Afterwards Gud-laug took land in settlement from Stream-frith on to Force, between fell and foreshore, and dwelt at Borg-holt. From him are come the <hi rend=sc>Stream-frith-men</hi>. His son was Gud-laf, who had a cog, and Thor-wolf, the son of Lopt the Old of Eyre-bank, another; wherewith they fought against earl Gurth Sig-waldsson in Middle-frith-sound and kept their goods, and upon this Gud-laf made <hi rend=sc>Gurth&apos;s verses</hi>. Another son of Gud-laug was Thor-fin, the father of Gud-laug, the father of Thor-dis, the mother of Thord, the father of Sturla the Elder of Hwam.

<p n=5.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wale the Strong</hi> was the name of a henchman of king Harold Fairhair. He wrought man-slaughter in a holy place, and so became an outlaw. He went out to the Southreys [Sodor Is.], and three of his sons came to Iceland. Hlif Horse-gelder was their mother. One of them was called Atli, another Alf-warin, the third Ead-win Stud [S: Stot].

<pb id=pb57a n=57><p>Atle Wale&apos;s son and As-mund, his son, took land in settlement from Fur [Shallow] to Lysa. As-mund dwelt in Lang-holt at Thora-toft. He had to wife Langholt-Thora. But when As-mund grew old he parted from Thora, for the too great throng of strangers that came there, and went into Oxl-land [Shoulder] and dwelt there till his death-day.

<p n=5.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> As-mund was put in howe there, and laid in a ship, and his thrall with him, who slew himself, and would not live after As-mund. He was laid in the other end of the ship. A little later Thora dreamed that As-mund told her that he was annoyed by the thrall. The place is called As-mund&apos;s grave where he is <hi>howed</hi>. This verse was heard in his howe:&mdash;

<p>[The verse is doubtful. See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 328.]

<p>After that the howe was searched, and the thrall put out of the ship.

<p>Thora had a hall built across the highway, and had a board ever standing there; and she sat outside on a stool, and asked every one that would to come and eat.

<p>Atle, the son of As-mund, was the father of Swart, the father of Gud-laf, the father of Gud-brand, the father of Swart the Smith, the father of priest Ey-wolf the monk.

<p n=5.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rolf</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-wolf the Thick</hi>, the son of Ey-wind Oak-crook, the brother of Illugi the gode of Fell, east by Side, took land in settlement from Lysa to Rawn-Raven. His son was Helgi of Temple-garth, the father of Fin-bow, and Beorn, and Hrod-wolf. Beorn was the father of Guest, the father of poet Ref.

<pb id=pb58a n=58><p n=5.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Solwe</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement between Cave-rawn [lava] and Sledge-bone-water. He dwelt at Burning first, and afterwards at Solve-crags, for he thought he could do more good there.


<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sig-mund</hi>, the son of Cetil Thistle, who had taken in settlement Thistle&apos;s-frith. He had to wife Hilde-gund. He took land in settlement between Cave-rawn and Bear-wick-rawn [lava]. He dwelt at Bath-brink, and is <hi>howed</hi> there. He had three sons. One was Einar <hi>or</hi> Ein-here, that afterwards dwelt at Bath-brink. Father and son sold Lon-land to Einar, that afterwards dwelt there. He was called Lon Einar.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> A whale drifted into his foreshore, and he cut part of it up, but the weather broke it away and drove it into the land of Einar Sig-mundsson. <corr sic="Lon Einar brought a charge of witchcraft against Hildi-gund for doing this" resp=errata>Lon Einar said that Hildigund&apos;s witchcraft had caused this</corr>.

<p>But when the whale was drifted out to sea away from Lon Einar, he set out, and followed it, and came upon it as Einar Sig-mundsson was cutting it up with his house carles. He cut at one of them, and gave him his death-blow.  Bath-brink Einar bade his namesake begone, &lsquo;for it will not do for you to attack us.&rsquo; Lon Einar went off, for he had too few men with him. Einar Sig-mundsson moved the whale hence. But on a time when he was not at home, Lon Einar came to Bath-brink with <corr sic=eight resp=errata>six</corr> men and summoned Hilde-gund for witchcraft. She was the daughter of Beini, the son of Mo, the son of Naddod of the Faereys. Einar came home just as Lon Einar was gone away. Hildi-gund told <pb id=pb59a n=59>him the news, and gave him a new-made kirtle. Einar took his shield and sword, and a work-horse, and rode after them; and the horse foundered at Mound-berg. Then Einar ran on as well as he could. But when he came beside the Drongs [sea-cliffs], he saw a troll-man [giant] sitting upon them, and dangling his feet so that they touched the surf, and dashing them together, so that the foam was dashed up from them, and he quoth a verse. [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 329. <hi>The verse has been retouched and altered by a later editor. See Notes.</hi>] Einar paid no heed to this. He came up with the others at a place called Man-falls-brink, and there they fought; but no iron could bite as Einar&apos;s kirtle. Four of Lon Einar&apos;s men fell, and two fled from him. The two namesakes fought long until the breech-belt of Lon Einar broke, and as he caught hold of it his namesake cut at him and gave him his death-blow. But Red-here, the thrall of Einar Sig-mundsson, saw him going off so hastily, and ran after him, and he saw the thralls of Lon Einar running away, and ran after them, and slew them both in Thrall-wick. And for this Einar gave him his freedom, and as much land as he could fence in in three days. The place is now called Red-here&apos;s-close where he dwelt.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Einar afterwards dwelt at Bath-brink, and he <corr resp=errata>is </corr><hi>howed</hi> there a short way from Sig-mund&apos;s howe, and his howe is ever green both winter and summer.

<p n=6.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Einar of Bath-brink had to wife Unn, the daughter of Thori, the brother of As-lac of Lang-dale. Hall-wih was their daughter, whom <pb id=pb60a n=60>Thor-beorn, Weevil&apos;s son, had to wife. Braid was the name of another son of Sig-mund, the brother [blank]. He had to wife Gund-hild, the daughter of As-lac of Lang-dale. Their son was Thor-mod, who had to wife Helga Ean-wend&apos;s daughter, the sister of Poet-Raven. Their daughter [was] Her-thrud, whom Simon had to wife. Their daughter [was] Gund-hild, whom Thor-gils had to wife. Their daughter [was] Wal-gerd, the mother of Fin-bow the Strong, the son of Gar. A third son of Sig-mund was named Thor-kell. He had to wife Io-red, daughter [of Tind] Hall-kell, son [blank for 12 letters].

<p n=6.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Thor-kell was the name of Lon Einar&apos;s son. He had to wife Grima, daughter of Hall-kell, before Thor-gils, Ari&apos;s son, had her to wife. Their son was Fin-ward.

<p>Bath-brink Einar&apos;s daughter was Arn-thora, whom Thor-gar, Wevil&apos;s son, had to wife. Their daughter was Yngw-hild, whom Thor-stan, the son of Snorri <hi>gode</hi>, had to wife. Their daughter [was] Ing-ud, whom As-beorn, Arn-thor&apos;s son, had to wife.

<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> 1. <hi rend=sc>Grim-kell</hi> was the name of a man who was the son of Wolf Crake, Red-here&apos;s son, the brother of Gund-beorn, after whom <hi>Gund-beorn&apos;s-reef</hi> was called. He took land in settlement from Bear-sarks-rawn to Ness-rawn, and west over Ondurt-ness, and dwelt at Saxe&apos;s-hillock, whence he drove out Saxe, the son of Elf-wine, the son of Wale; and he dwelt thereafter at Rawn, beside Saxe&apos;s-hillock. Grim-kell had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Wal-theow the Old. Their son was Thor-arin Corne; he was very skin-strong, <hi>or</hi> lycanthropic, and he lies in Corne&apos;s-howe. Thus quoth a man that had broken into his howe (see Corpus Poet, Bor. i. 362):&mdash;

<pb id=pb61a n=61><lg>
    <l>I <sic corr=sprang>sprung</sic> into Corne&apos;s howe,
    <l>And carried away his belt and his ring.
</lg>

<p n=7.1.1>Thor-arin Corne had to wife Iorunn, the daughter of Einar o&apos; Staf-holt. Their daughter [was] Iron-gerd, whom Wolf Uggson had to wife.

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Claeng was the name of another son of Grim-kell. He had to wife Ord-frid, daughter of Helgi of Hwan-eyre [Angelica-eyre]. Their son [was] Colle, who had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of As-brand of Comb. Their son Was Sceg, father of Thor-catla, whom Illugi had to wife, the son of Thor-wald, the son of Tind, the father of Gils, who slew Giaf-wald. Bard was the name of another son of Coll. He had to wife Wal-gerd, daughter of Wid-here. Wig-dis was their daughter, whom Thor-beorn the Thick had to wife. Their daughter [was] Thor-dis, whom Thor-brand of Aul-wers-mere had to wife. Thore was a son of theirs, and Bearne of Broad-bowster, and Torve. Asdis was the name of another of Bard&apos;s daughters. Thor-beorn Thor-waldsson, the brother of Moon-Leot by the same mother, had her to wife first. Their children were: Thor-rid, whom Thor-grim, Ord&apos;s son, had to wife; their children, Gar-mund of Maw-lithe, and thirteen others. Scule Ior-wendsson afterwards had Asdis to wife; Walgerd o&apos; Moss-fell was their daughter.

<p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Alf-arin</hi>, the son of Wale, had first taken in settlement all the ness between Bear-wick-rawn and Brow. His sons were these: Haus-coll, that dwelt at Haus-colls-river, and Ingiald, that dwelt at Ingiald&apos;s-hillock, and Gote at Gote&apos;s-beck, and Holm-kell at Force by Holm-kell&apos;s-river.

<pb id=pb62a n=62><p n=7.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>An-laf Bag</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement inside of Brow up to Force-water, and dwelt at Anlaf&apos;s-wick.

<p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Worm the Slender</hi> was the name of a man that came with his ship into Frodes-mouth, and dwelt at Brimils-field [Surf-seals-field] some winters. An-laf Bag drove him away, and took in settlement all the old wick between Brow and Byland&apos;s-head, and he dwelt afterwards at Frod-water. His son was Thor-beorn the Thick, that fought with Thor-arin the Black, and fell himself and three men with him, whereon Thor-arin made the <hi rend=sc>Mew-lithe-men&apos;s verses</hi>, according as it is told in the <hi rend=sc>History of the Eyrebiders</hi>. This is one of them. [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 57&ndash;60.] Because of these words they fought a second time.

<p n=7.5.1>Thor-beorn had to wife Thor-rid, daughter of Bare the Thick, the son of Thor-stan Torsk-biter. Their son was Cetil Champion, and he was at that time abroad; he was the father of Hrod-ny, whom Thor-stan, the son of Battle Styr, had to wife.

<p n=7.5.2>[S: Double text.] His son was Thor-beorn the Thick. He had to wife first Thor-rid, the daughter of Asbrand of Cambe, and their children were Cetil Champion, Hall-stan, and Gund-laug, and Thor-gerd, whom A-mund Seone had to wife. Afterwards Thor-beorn had to wife Thor-rid, daughter of Bare the Thick, and Thor-dis, Sour&apos;s daughter. [Here ends the double text.]

<p n=7.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Thor-beorn the Thick summoned Gar-rid Bow-foot&apos;s daughter for witchcraft.  After his son Gund-laug died of madness, which he <pb id=pb63a n=63>caught when he went to learn wisdom from Gar-rid. She was the mother of Thor-arin the Mew-lithe. In this case Arn-kell the gode <corr sic=called resp=errata>was called on to summon </corr>an Inquest of Twelve, and cleared her, for Thor-arin took oath at the altar-ring, and so the case fell to the ground. But after that <corr sic="a stallion of Thor-beorn was">some stallions of Thor-beorn were</corr> lost in the fell, and he charged this on Thor-arin, and went to Mew-lithe, and set a door-doom <hi>or</hi> court of execution. They were twelve together; but Thor-arin and his men were seven against them&mdash;Alf-gar, a Southrey-man [Sodor-man], and Nail, and Beorn the East-man, and three house carles. They broke up the court, and fought there in the yard. Ead Thor-arin&apos;s wife called on the women to part them. But one man fell of Thor-arin&apos;s, and two of Thor-beorn&apos;s. Thor-beorn and his men went off, and bound up their wounds by the stack-yard up beside Walls. Ead&apos;s hand was found in the yard. Then Thor-arin went after them, and came upon them near the garth. Nail fled weeping away and up into the fell; and Thor-arin slew Thor-beorn there, and wounded Hall-stan to the death. Five of Thor-beorn&apos;s men fell there.

<p>Arn-kell and Wer-mund helped Thor-arin, and gathered a force at Arn-kells. Snorre the <hi>gode</hi> took up the case for Thor-beorn&apos;s death, and outlawed at Thors-ness-moot all those that had been at the slaughter. After that he burnt Alf-gar&apos;s boat at Salt-eyre-mouth; Arn-kell bought them another ship at Daymeals-ness, and conveyed them out beyond the Islands. Thence arose the enmity between Arn-kell and Snorri the <hi>gode</hi>. Cetil the Champion was then abroad. He was the father of Hrod-ny, whom Thor-stan, Battle-Styr&apos;s son, had to wife.

<pb id=pb64a n=64><p n=7.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sigrod Swine-head</hi> was a great champion: he dwelt at Quern-voe-strand [Mill-stone quarry bay].

<p n=7.7.1><hi rend=sc>Here-wolf</hi>, his son, was eight years old when he slew a bear o&apos; the wood, because he had bitten his goat, whereon this ditty was made:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Bruin Lack-tail bit Herewolf&apos;s goat;
    <l>But Herewolf hocker-tail [bowed-tail] avenged his goat on Bruin.
</lg>

<p n=7.7.2>Here-wolf was twelve winters old when he avenged his father. He was the doughtiest of men.

<p n=7.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Here-wolf</hi> went out to Iceland in his old age, and took land in settlement between By-lands-head and Kirk-frith. His son was Thor-stan Col-sceg <hi>or</hi> Coal-beard, the father of Thor-wolf, the father of Thor-arin the Swarthy, the Mew-lithe-man, and of Gud-ny, whom Wer-mund the Slender had to wife. Their son was Brand the Open-handed, and [their daughter] Thor-finna, whom Thor-stan Cog&apos;s son had to wife.

<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>West-here</hi>, the son of Thor-wolf Bladder-pate. He had to wife Swan [MS: Span], Here-red&apos;s daughter. Their son was Os-gar. West-here went to Iceland with his father, a very old man, and took in settlement Eyre-land, and the river between Kirk-frith and Col-grave-frith, and dwelt at Andorth-Eyre. Thor-wolf and his son are both howed at Scald-ness <hi>or</hi> Pate-ness.

<p n=8.1.1>Os-gar, West-here&apos;s son, had to wife Helga, Ceallac&apos;s daughter. Their son was Thor-lac; his son was Stan-thor, whose mother was Thor-rid, daughter of Ead-win Stot. A second son was Thord Bligh, who had to wife Ord-katla, daughter of Thor-wald, the son of Thor-mod the <hi>gode</hi>. <pb id=pb65a n=65>The third son was Thor-mod, who had to wife Thor-gerd, the daughter of Thor-brand of Elfets-frith. His fourth son was Berg-thor, who fell in Veir-frith. Stan-thor had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thor-gils, Ari&apos;s son. Gund-laug was their son, who had to wife Thor-rid the Wise, the daughter of Snorre gode.

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Col</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement from west of Friths&apos;-horn to Trolls&apos;-neck, and west over Bear-sarks-eyre to Rawn-frith <hi>or</hi> Lava-frith. His son was Thor-arin, and Thor-grim, after whom Colsons-fell is named. The father and sons all dwelt at Col-grave. From them are come the <hi rend=sc>Col-grave-men</hi>.

<p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ead-win Stot</hi> [was] the son of Wale the Strong. He had to wife Myruna [Muir-wen], the daughter of Beadh-mac [S: Maddad], king of the Irish. He took in settlement all Rawns-frith down from Rawn, between Swine-mere and Trolls-neck. He dwelt at Rawns-frith, and was a big strong man. From him are come the <hi rend=sc>Stream-frith-men</hi>.

<p n=8.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> In the autumn he saw an apple-gray stallion run down from Hards-mere [<hi>or</hi> Herd&apos;s-mere] and go to his <corr sic=stud-horse resp=errata>stud-horses</corr>, and he overcame Ead-win&apos;s stallion. Then Ead-win went and caught the gray horse, and put him into a sled, such as a yoke of oxen draw, and so carted home all his tedded hay. This stallion was easy-tempered till noon; but as the day wore on he would stamp up to his fetlocks in the ground, but after sunset he tore away his harness, and ran up to the mere, and was never seen again.

<p n=8.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> The son of Ead-win was Stan, the father of Helga, whom <corr sic=Ari resp=errata>An</corr> of <pb id=pb66a n=66>Rawn had to wife. Their son was Mar, the father of Gud-rid, the mother of Ceartan [Cheartach] and Ani of Kirk-fell. As-beorn was the name of another son of Ead-win; the third was Swart-head [Ceann Dubh], and [their] daughter Thor-rid, whom As-gar of Eyre had to wife. Their son was Thor-lac.


<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn</hi> was the name of the son of Cetil Flat-neb and of Yngw-hild, daughter of Cetil Wether, the herse of Ring-ric. Beorn abode behind in his own land when his father Cetil went to the Southreys; but when Cetil withheld the scot <hi>or</hi> tribute-money from king Harold Fairhair, then the king drove Beorn, his son, out of his own lands and took them into his own hands. Then Beorn went west over sea; but he would not settle down there, nor take on him Christendom like the other children of Cetil, wherefore he was called Beorn the Eastron. He had to wife Geaf-laug [Geibh-leach], Ceallac&apos;s daughter, the sister of Beorn the Strong.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Beorn the Eastron went to Iceland, and took land in settlement between Rawns-frith and Staf-water, and dwelt in Beorn-haven at Borg-holt, and had the shielings up at Shiels, and kept up a great estate. He died in Beorn-haven, and was howed by Borg-beck.

<p n=9.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> The son of Beorn and Geaf-laug was Ceallac the Old that dwelt at Beorn-haven after his father; and [also] Oht-here, the father of Beorn, the father of Wig-fus of Drapa-lithe, whom Snorre gode had slain. Another son of Oht-here was Helge. He harried in Scotland, and won there as his booty Nidh-beorg, daughter of king Beolan and Cadh-lina [Cath-leen], daughter of Walking-Rolf.  He took her to <pb id=pb67a n=67>wife, and their son was Os-wif the Sage, and Einar Rattle-Scale, who was drowned on Einars-reef in Shiel-sound [H: Seal-sound], and his shield came ashore at Shield-ey, and his cloak at Cloak-holm.

<p>Einar was the father of Thor-gerd, the mother of Her-dis, the mother of Stan the poet. Os-wif had to wife Thor-dis, the daughter of Theod-wolf of Haven. Their children were Os-pac, the father of Wolf the Marshall <hi>or</hi> Staller, and Thor-wolf, Tor-rad, Einar, Thor-kell, and Thor-beorn. They were outlawed for the slaughter of Ceartan [Cheartach] Anlafsson. Os-wif&apos;s daughter was Gud-run, the mother of Thord-cat and Thor-lac and Bolli and Gelli.

<p>Wil-gar was the name of a son of Beorn the Eastron.

<p n=9.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ceallac the Old</hi> had to wife Astrid, the daughter of <hi>herse</hi> Rod-wolf and Ond-otta, sister of Aulwi Bairn-carle. Their son was Thor-grim gode; his sons Battle-Styr, and Wer-mund the Slender, and Brand, father of Thor-lac.

<p>The daughters of Ceallac the Old were Gerd, whom Thor-mod gode had to wife, and Helga, whom As-gar of Eyre had to wife.


<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf</hi>, the son of Erne-wolf Whale-driver, dwelt in Mostr, wherefore he was called Moster-beardie. He was a great sacrificer, and put his trust in Thor [Thunder]. He came to Iceland by reason of the oppression of king Harold, and sailed to the south of the country. But when he came west off Broad-frith, he cast his porch pillars overboard, whereon Thunder was carven, saying as he did so <pb id=pb68a n=68>that Thunder should go ashore where he wished Thor-wolf to settle, and promising to hallow to Thunder all his settlement and call it after him. Thor-wolf sailed into Broad-frith, and named the frith, and landed on the south of the frith near the middle, and there he found Thunder driven on a ness, which is now called Thor&apos;s-ness <hi>or</hi> Thunder-ness. They landed there in a creek <hi>or</hi> bay, which Thor-wolf called Temple-voe. There he raised his homestead, and made there a great temple, and hallowed it to Thunder, at the place that is now called Temple-stead. The frith was well-nigh unsettled at that time.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Thor-wolf took in settlement the land from Staf-water inward to Thors-river, and called it Thors-ness. He had so great faith in the mountain that stood upon the ness that he called it Holy-fell, and thereat should no man look [pray] unwashen; moreover there was such a hallowed place of peace <hi>or</hi> sanctuary there, that nothing, whether man or beast, might be harmed <hi>or</hi> put to death on that hill [nor driven off], save it came off of its own will. It was the faith of Thor-wolf and all his kin that they should all die into this hill.

<p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> There on the ness where Thunder came ashore Thor-wolf held all dooms [courts], and there was set up <hi>or</hi> established the Hundred-moot, by the counsel <hi>and</hi> authority of all the men of that part. And when men were there at the moot there should be no <hi>elf-driving</hi> [defilement] made on shore; but there was a reef appointed to this end that they called Dirt-reef, for they would not have such a holy field defiled [as that was].

<p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> But when Thor-wolf was dead, and Thor-stan his son still young, <pb id=pb69a n=69>then Thor-grim, Ceallac&apos;s son, and Os-gar, his brother-in-law, would not go out to this reef to do their errands, and the <hi rend=sc>Thors-ness-men</hi> would not endure that such a holy field should be defiled, wherefore they fought, Thor-stan Torsk-biter and Thor-gar Brooch against Thor-grim and Os-gar, there on the moot about the reef; and certain men fell there, and many more were wounded, ere they were set at peace. Thord Gelli set them at one; and inasmuch as neither side would let their case drop, and as the field was now unhallowed by bloodshed in feud, it was agreed to carry the moot away from that place and inland to the ness where it now is. It was then a very holy place. There standeth still <hi>Thunder&apos;s stone</hi>, on which they broke the men that they sacrificed there, and hard by is the <hi>doom-ring</hi> where they doomed men to be sacrificed. There Thord Gelli sat <hi>or</hi> established a Quarter-moot, by the counsel <hi>and</hi> authority of all the men of the Quarter.

<p n=10.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> A son of Thor-wolf Most-beardie was Hall-stan the Torsk-frith gode, the father of Thor-stan Swart the Sage. Osc was mother of Thor-stan Swart, the daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Another son of Thor-wolf was Thor-stan Torsk-biter. He had to wife Thora, the daughter of <corr sic=Aulaf resp=errata>Anlaf</corr> Feilan, and the sister of Thord Gelle. Their son was Thor-grim, the father of Snorre <hi>gode</hi>, and Barc the Thick, who was the father of Sam, whom As-gar slew.


<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-rod</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Gar-fred</hi> was the name of a man that went to Iceland, and with him Fin-gar, the son of Thor-stan Snow-skate, and Wolf-here the Champion. They came from Haloga-land to Iceland. <pb id=pb70a n=70>Gar-rod took land in settlement from Thors-river up to Lang-dale-water. He dwelt at Eyre.

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Gar-rod gave land to Wolf-here, his shipmate, on both sides of Wolf-here&apos;s-fell, and inward from the fell.

<p n=11.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Gar-rod gave Fin-gar land up over Elfets-frith. He dwelt at the place that is now called Cars-stead. He was the father of Thor-fin, the father of Thor-brand of Elfets-frith, who had to wife Thor-borg, the daughter of Thor-fin, Seal-Thori&apos;s son.

<p n=11.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Gar-rid was the name of a sister of Gar-rod, a widow after Beorn, the son of Bale-work Blindinga-triona [prow-fixing]. Thor-wolf was the name of their son. Gar-rid and Thor-wolf went to Iceland after the death of Beorn, and were the first winter at Eyre. In the spring Gar-rod gave his sister a homestead in Borg-dale-land. Thor-wolf went abroad, and lay out on wicking-cruises. Gar-rid did not spare her food, but had her hall built across the highway. She used to sit on a stool outside and bade guests in, and a board <hi>or</hi> table was always standing indoors with meat upon it.

<p>Thor-wolf came back to Iceland after Gar-rid&apos;s death. He challenged Wolf-here for his land, and offered him wager of battle. Wolf-here was old and childless; he fell in the wager of battle, but Thor-wolf was wounded in the foot, and went lame ever after, wherefore he was called Bow-foot. Thor-wolf took some of Wolf-here&apos;s land after him; but some Thor-fin of Elfets-frith took, putting in it two of his freedmen, Wolf-here and Aurlyg.

<pb id=pb71a n=71><p n=11.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Gar-rod of Eyre was the father of Thor-gar Brooch, who moved his homestead out of Eyre up under the fell. He was the father of Thord, the father of Atle.

<p>Thor-wolf Bow-foot was the father of Arn-kell gode and Gar-rid, whom Thor-wolf of Mew-lithe, the father of Thor-arin, had to wife.

<p n=11.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> The sons of Thor-brand of Elfets-frith, son of Thor-fin, were these: Thor-laf Cimbe, and Thor-ord, Snorre, Thor-fin, Illugi, Thor-mod. They had a feud with Arn-kell gode on the heritage of their freedmen, and were at his slaying with Snorre gode at Aurlyg-stead. After that Thor-laf Cimbe went abroad, and it was then that Arn-beorn, the son of As-brand of Broad-wick, struck him with a porridge-spurtle. Cimbe made game of it. Thord Blig <hi>or</hi> Bligh twitted him with it at Thor-ness-moot, when he asked for his sister Helga to wife. Then Cimbe struck Bligh with a sand-turf, whence arose the feuds of the Eyre-biders and the sons of Thor-brand and Snorre gode. They fought at Gar-wor, and in Elfets-frith, and in Weir-frith <hi>or</hi> Spears-frith.

<p n=11.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-berg</hi> was the name of a man that went from Ja-frith to Iceland, and took in settlement both the Lang-dales, and dwelt in Western Lang-dale. His son was As-lac, who had to wife Arn-laf, daughter of Thord Gelli. Their children [were these]: Illugi the Strong and Gund-hild, whom Broad first had to wife, but afterwards Hall-dor of Holm-lair. Illugi the Strong had to wife Gud-laf, the daughter of Cetil Smithy-block. Their sons [were] Ey-wolf and Eindride and Coll and Gelli; and their daughters Here-thrud, whom Thorgrim, <pb id=pb72a n=72>the son of Wer-mund the Slender, had to wife; and Frith-gerd, whom Ord, the son of Drafli, had to wife; and Gud-rid, whom Berg [<hi>or</hi> Berg-thor], the son of Thor-mod, the son of Thor-lac, first had to wife, and afterwards Ior-wend of Scorri-dale; and Io-dis, whom Mar, the son of Illugi, Ari&apos;s son, had to wife; and Arn-laf, that Coll, the son of Thord Bligh, had to wife. From Illugi are the <hi rend=sc>Lang-dales-men</hi> come.

<p n=11.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Stan</hi>, the wide-sailor, the son of Wig-biod [Ui Beth?], the brother of Thore-haust-myrk, took in settlement Shaw-strand up to match with the land of Thor-berg, and inside to Lax-water. He dwelt at Broad-bowster. His son was Thor-hard, who took in settlement Hot-dale, and Thor-gest, who had to wife Arn-ora, the daughter of Thord Gelli. Their sons [of Thor-gest and Arn-ora] were Stan the Law-speaker, and Haf-lide, and Thor-hard.


<p n=12.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wald</hi>, the son of As-wald, the son of Wolf, the son of Oxen-Thori, and <hi rend=sc>Eiric the Red</hi>, his son, left Iader for the sake of manslaughter [done there], and took in settlement land at Horn-strand, and dwelt at Drongs, where Thor-wald died. Then Eiric took to wife Theod-hild, daughter of Ior-wend, Atli&apos;s son, and of Thor-borg Cog-breast, whom Thor-beorn the Hawk-dale-man then had to wife. Upon which Eiric removed from the North, and made a clearance in Hawk-dale, and dwelt at Eiric&apos;s-stead hard by the Mere-horn. Then Eiric&apos;s thralls made an avalanche to fall down upon Wal-theow&apos;s house at Wal-theow-stead, but Ey-wolf Saur <hi>or</hi> Sour, his kinsman, slew the thralls close by Sceid&apos;s-brink, up above Mere-horn; whereupon Eiric slew Ey-wolf Saur. He also slew Wager of Battle-Raven at Game-halls. <pb id=pb73a n=73>Gar-stan and Ord of Iorwa, the kinsmen of Ey-wolf, took up the case after him, and Eiric was put out of Hawk-dale. He took in settlement then Brock-ey and Oxen-ey, and dwelt at Ted in Southrey<corr resp=errata> the first winter</corr>.

<p n=12.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But<corr sic=" the first winter" resp=errata></corr> he lent Thor-gest his seat-stocks [high-seat pillars]. Afterwards Eiric went to Oxen-ey, and dwelt at Eiric&apos;s-stead. Then he called for his seat-stocks, but could not get them. Eiric fetched the seat-stocks at Broad-bowster, but Thor-gest came after him. They fought a short way from the houses at Drongs. There fell the two sons of Thor-gest, and some other men. After this they both kept a company of armed men with them. Styr and Ey-wolf Æsa&apos;s son of Swiney sided with Eiric, as did the sons of Thor-brand of Elfets-frith, and Thor-beorn, Weevil&apos;s son. But Thor-gest was backed by the sons of Thord-Gelli and Thor-gar of Hot-dale-river, As-lac of Lang-dale, and Illugi his son. Eiric and his fellows were outlawed at Thor-ness-moot. He made his ship ready for sea in Eiric&apos;s-voe; but Ey-wolf hid him in Dimun-voe while Thor-gest was seeking for him out in the Islands. Thor-beorn and Ey-wolf and Styr conveyed Eiric out through the Islands. He told them that he was minded to go in quest of that land which Gund-beorn, the son of Wolf Crow, saw when he was driven west of Iceland and found Gund-beorn&apos;s-reef. He said that he would seek back to his friends if he found the land.

<p n=12.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Eiric sailed from Snow-fells-iockle <hi>or</hi> Glacier, and made Mid-iockle <hi>or</hi> Glacier [in Greenland], at a place called Blue-Sark. He stood thence [i. e. from Blue-Sark] south along the land to find out if it were inhabitable <pb id=pb74a n=74>anywhere. He sailed west of Wharf [doubled Cape Wharf], and he stayed the first winter in Eiricsey near the middle of East-settlement, and the spring after he went to Eiric&apos;s-frith, and made him a homestead there, and gave the places in country round far and wide names. The second winter he stayed in Eiric&apos;s-holm, off Wharf-peak; but the third summer he went right north to Snow-fell, and inside up Raven&apos;s-frith. Then he thought he was come to the bottom of Eiric&apos;s-frith, and he turned back again, and was the third winter in Eiricsey off Eiric&apos;s-frith-mouth.

<p n=12.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> After this the same summer he went to Iceland, coming into Broad-frith. That winter he was at Holm&apos;s-lair with Ing-wolf. In the spring Eiric and Thor-gest fought, and Eiric <corr sic="won the victory" resp=errata>got the worst of it</corr>. After that they were set at one.

<p n=12.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> That summer Eiric went out to settle the land that he had found, and which he called <hi rend=sc>Green-land</hi>; for he said that men would be the more ready to go thither if it had a good name.

<p n=12.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Ari, Thor-gils son, says that that summer five-and-twenty ships sailed to Green-land out of Borg-frith and Broad-frith; but fourteen only reached [their port]; some were driven back, and some were lost.

<p>This was 16 [S: 15] winters before Christendom was made law in Iceland.

<p n=12.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Here-wolf</hi>, the son of Bard, the son of Here-wolf, the kinsman of Ing-wolf the Settler. To this [elder] Here-wolf Ing-wolf gave land between the Voe and Reek-ness. Here-wolf the <pb id=pb75a n=75>Younger went to Greenland with Eiric. With him on board his ship was a Southrey-man, a Christian, that made the <hi>Sea-Fence Pæan</hi>, wherein is this stave:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>I pray the guileless Patron of the Monks to forward my voyage.
    <l>May the Lord of Earth&apos;s lofty Hall hold his hand over me!
</lg>

                            <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 54.]


<p n=12.7.1>Here-wolf took in settlement Here-wolf&apos;s-frith, and dwelt at Here-wolf&apos;s-ness; he was the most well-born of men.

<p n=12.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Eiric the Red took in settlement Eiric&apos;s-frith, and dwelt at Brent-lithe, and Leif, his son, after him.

<p n=12.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> These men took land in settlement in Greenland, and went out with Eiric; [then] Here-wolf Here-wolf&apos;s-frith, and he dwelt at Here-wolf&apos;s-ness; Cetil, Cetil&apos;s-frith; Raven, Raven&apos;s-frith; Solwe, Solwe&apos;s-dale; Snorre, Thor-brand&apos;s son, Elfets-frith; Thor-beorn Glora, Mast-frith; Einar, Einar&apos;s-frith; Haf-grim, Haf-grim&apos;s-frith and Mere&apos;s-wharf; Arn-laugh <hi>or</hi> Erne-low, Arn-laugh&apos;s-frith; but some went to the Western Settlements.

<p n=12.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Thor-kell fare-sark</hi>, the mother&apos;s cousin [on the sister side] of Eiric the Red. He went to Greenland with Eiric, and took in settlement Whalesey-frith, and between Eiric&apos;s-frith and Einar&apos;s-frith, and dwelt at Whalesey-frith. From him are the <hi rend=sc>Whalesey-frith-folk</hi> come. He was very greatly <hi>strength-eked</hi> [i. e. had magic strength]. He swam after a fat wether out to Whalesey, and carried it home on his back when he wished to welcome his <pb id=pb76a n=76>kinsman Eiric; for his boat was not sea-worthy. It is a long half week <hi>or</hi> mile. Thor-kell is buried in the yard at Whalesey-frith, and has ever since haunted the houses there.


<p n=13.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ing-wolf the Strong</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Thor-wald</hi>, the sons of Ari, the son of Awald Pinched-in-the-Breast, took land in settlement inward from Lax-water to Scram-leap-water, and dwelt at Holm-lair. The son of Thor-wald was Thor-laf, the father of Hall-dor, who afterwards had to wife Gund-hild, the daughter of As-lac, the son of Hrod-here o&apos; Lang-dale. Their son <hi>was</hi> Thori, who had to wife Hall-weig, the daughter of Tind, the wife of Hall-kell. Their son <hi>was</hi> Brand, who had to wife Thor-gerd, Brand&apos;s daughter. Their son <hi>was</hi> Hall-dor, who had to wife Thor-katla, Thor-grim&apos;s daughter. Their son was prior Brand the historian, who hath written most of the <hi rend=sc>Genealogy of the Borg-frith-folk</hi>.


<p n=14.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anlaf the White</hi> was the name of a Host-king. He was the son of king Ingiald, the son of Helgi, the son of Anlaf, the son of God-fred, the son of Half-dan White-leg, the king of the Upland-folk. Anlaf the White harried in the West in wicking cruises, and won Dyflin [Dublin] in Ireland, and Dublin-shire, and made himself king over it. He took to wife <hi rend=sc>Aud</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Ead the Deep-wealthy</hi>, the daughter of Cetil Flat-neb, the son of Beorn Buna, a lord of Norway. Thor-stan the Red was the name of their son. Anlaf fell in Ireland in battle, but Aud and Thor-stan went then to the Southreys. Then Thor-stan <pb id=pb77a n=77>took to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Ey-wind the Eastman, the sister of Helgi the Lean. They had many children. Anlaf Feilan [Bull] was the name of their son, and their daughters were Groa [Gruoch] and Olof, <hi>and</hi> Osc and Thor-hilda, Thor-gerd and Wig-dis. Thor-stan became Host-king, and joined fellowship with Sig-rod the mighty earl, the son of Ey-stan Glumra. They won Cata-ness [Caithness] and Sutherland, Ros [Ross] and Morævi [Moray], and more than half Scotland. Thor-stan was king over [these lands] till the Scots betrayed him, and he fell there in battle.

<p n=14.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Aud was in Caithness when she heard the news of the fall of Thor-stan. She had a cog made in a wood in secret; and when she was ready she held her course out to the Orkneys. There she gave in marriage Gruoch, the daughter of Thor-stan the Red. She was the mother of Gre-lad [Gre-liath], whom Thor-fin Scull-cleaver had to wife.

<p>After that Aud went out to seek Iceland. She had on board with her twenty freedmen.

<p n=14.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> There was a man whose name was <hi rend=sc>Coll</hi>, the son of Wether-grim, the son of Ase the <hi>herse</hi>. He had the command with Aud, and was held in greatest esteem by her. Coll had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Thor-stan the Red.

<p n=14.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Erp</hi> [Welsh Yrp] was the name of a freedman of Aud&apos;s. He was the son of earl Meldun [Mael-duine] of Scotland, who fell before earl Sigrod the Mighty, the mother of Myr-giol [Muir-gheal], daughter of Glio-mal [Gleo-mael], king of the Irish. Earl Sigrod took them as booty, and made slaves of them. Muir-gheal was bondmaid to the earl&apos;s wife, <pb id=pb78a n=78>and served her faithfully. She was cunning in many things. She took care of the lady&apos;s <hi>or</hi> queen&apos;s [Sigrod&apos;s wife] unborn [posthumous] child while she was in the bath [read, in bonds?]. Afterwards Aud bought her at a high price, and promised her her freedom if she would serve Thor-rid, the wife of Thor-stan the Red, as she had served her lady. Muir-gheal and Erp, her son, went to Iceland with Aud.

<p n=14.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Aud went first to the Fareys, and there gave in marriage Olof, daughter of Thor-stan the Red, whence the <hi rend=sc>Gate-beardies</hi> come.

<p n=14.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> After that she set out to seek Iceland, and came ashore at Pumice-links <hi>or</hi> Lava-links, and was wrecked there. She went to Keel-ness to Helgi Beolan, her brother. He bade her stay with him, and half her company with her; but she thought that was but a mean offer, and said that he was a poor fellow as he had always been. She then went west to Broad-frith to her brother Beorn. He came to meet her with his house-carles; for he said he knew his sister&apos;s proud heart, and he bade her to his house with all her men; and she accepted this offer.

<p n=14.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Afterwards in the spring, Aud and her company went into Broad-frith to explore the land. They took their day meal at a place north [so S, but MS. south] of Broad-frith, which is now called Day-meal-ness. Afterwards they went inland through the island channels, and landed at the ness, where also Aud lost her comb, and this ness she called Comb-ness.

<p n=14.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Aud took in settlement all the Dale-lands [<hi>here falls in the <pb id=pb79a n=79>second blank in H; see Introduction</hi>], at the inward of the friths, from Day-meal-ness to Scram-leap-water. She dwelt at Hwam, on the Trout-water-oyce, at a place called Aud&apos;s-tofts. She had her prayer-place <hi>or</hi> oratory at Cross-hillocks. There she had crosses set up, for she was baptized and of the true faith. Her kinsmen afterwards used to hold these hillocks holy, and a barrow <hi>or</hi> high-place was made there <corr sic="and sacrifice offered" resp=errata>when sacrifices began</corr>. They believed that they should die into these hillocks; and there was Thord-Gelle buried, ere that his sons succeeded to the chieftaincy [after him], as it is told in the history of him [Thord-Gelli&apos;s Saga].


<p n=15.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aud</hi> gave land to her shipmates and freedmen.

<p n=15.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil</hi> [Cathal] was the name of a man to whom she gave land from Scram-leap-water to Haurd-dale-water. He dwelt at Cetil-stead. He was the father of West-lide, and of Einar, the father of Clamp-iron, and of Thor-beorn, whom Styr slew, and of Thor-dis, the mother of Thor-gest.

<p n=15.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Haurd</hi> was the name of a shipmate of Aud. To him she gave Haurd-dale. His son was As-beorn, who had to wife Thor-borg, the daughter of Mid-frith Sceg. Their children <hi>were</hi> Hnace, who had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Thor-gar Scar-cheek, and Inge-borg, whom Illuge the Black had to wife. [Blank for a line.]

<p n=15.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wivil</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Weevil</hi> was the name of a freedman of Aud&apos;s. He asked her why she did not give him a homestead as she had to others. But she said that it did not matter, because he would always be held <pb id=pb80a n=80>a gentleman wherever he was. She gave him Weevil&apos;s-dale. There he dwelt, and had a feud with Haurd. The son of Weevil was Thor-beorn, the father of Gud-rid, whom Thor-stan, the son of Eiric the Red, had to wife [<hi>part of line missing, which probably ran</hi>], &lsquo;and afterwards Thor-fin Man-promise.&rsquo; [<hi>Later add.</hi>] From him are the bishops come&mdash;Beorn, Thor-lac, Brand.

<p>Another son of Weevil&apos;s was Thor-gar, who had to wife Arn-ora, the daughter of Lon-Einar. Their daughter <hi>was</hi> Yngw-held, whom Thor-stan, the son of Snorre <hi>gode</hi>, had to wife.

<p n=15.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hound</hi> [Cu] was the name of a freedman of Aud&apos;s, a Scottish man. To him she gave Hound-dale, and there he dwelt a long while.

<p n=15.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sunk-wolf</hi> was the name of a freedman of Aud&apos;s. To him she gave Sunk-wolf-dale. He dwelt at Broad-bowster, and many a man is come from him.

<p n=15.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> To <hi rend=sc>Erp</hi> [Welsh Yrp], the son of earl Mel-dun [Mael-duin], who was spoken of above, Aud gave his freedom and Sheep-fells-land. From him the <hi rend=sc>Erp-lings</hi> are come. Worm was the name of a son of Erp&apos;s. Another was called Gund-beorn, the father of Arn-thora, whom Col-beorn, Thord&apos;s son, had to wife. The third, As-gar, the father of Thor-orna, whom Summer-lide Hramp&apos;s son, had to wife. A daughter of Erp&apos;s was Hall-dis, whom Alf-a-Dale had to wife. Duf-nall [Dubh-nall] was yet another son of Erp&apos;s. <hi>He was</hi> the father of Thor-kell, the father of Shelty [the Shetlander], the father of Beine. Scate was yet another son of Erp&apos;s. <hi>He was</hi> the father of Thord, the father of Gisle, the father of Thor-gerd.

<pb id=pb81a n=81><p n=15.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn</hi> was the name of a man that dwelt at Mere in Hawk-dale. He had to wife [<hi>blank of half a line</hi>], and their daughter was Hall-frid, whom Hos-coll of Lax-water-dale had to wife. They had many children. Bard <hi>or</hi> Barrod was their son, and Thor-lac, the father of Bolle, who had to wife Gud-run, Os-wif&apos;s daughter. Their sons were these: Thor-lac and Hos-coll, Swart and Bolle; Her-dis and Thor-gerd <hi>were</hi> their daughters.

<p n=15.8.1>Thord, Ing-unn&apos;s son, was Gud-run&apos;s first husband, and their children were Thord Cat and Arn-katla <hi>or</hi> Erne-katla.

<p n=15.8.2>Thor-kell, Ey-wolf&apos;s son, was Gud-run&apos;s <hi>third and</hi> last husband. Their children were Gelle and Riupa [Caper-cailzie].

<p n=15.8.3>Bard, Hos-coll&apos;s son, was the father of Hall-borg, whom Hall, the son of Slaughter-Styr, had to wife. Hall-gerd Turn-breech was a daughter of Hos-coll, and [also] Thor-gerd and Thur-rid.

<p n=15.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> There was a man whose name was <hi rend=sc>Coll</hi>, the son of Wether-Grim. He took in settlement all Lax-water-dale all up to Hawk-dale-water. He was called Coll o&apos; the Dales. He had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Their children were these: Hos-coll and Gruoch, whom We-laf the Old had to wife, and Thor-katla, whom Thorgar-gode had to wife. Hos-coll had to wife Hall-frid, the daughter of Thor-beorn of Mere. Thor-lac was their son. He had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Arn-beorn, the son of Sleight Beorn. Their son was Bolle. <pb id=pb82a n=82>Hos-coll bought Mel-corca [Mael-....], the daughter of Myr-ceartan [Muir-certach], king of the Irish. Their sons were Anlaf Peacock and Helge. Hos-coll&apos;s daughters were Thor-rid and Thor-gerd, and Hall-gerd Turn-breech. An-laf had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Egil Bald Grimsson. Their sons were Ceartan and Hall-dor, Stan-thor and Thor-berg. The daughters of An-laf were Thor-rid, Thor-berg the Fat, and Berg-thora. Ceartan had to wife Raven, the daughter of As-gar Eider-duck. Their sons were As-gar and Scum.

<p n=15.9.1><ab type=parNum>9. b.</ab> <hi>The scribe of S has here skipped a whole §, which we have put in from Laxdæla, but not translated here.</hi>

<p n=15.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Here-wolf, the son of Eywind Eld, afterwards had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Their son was Hrut <hi>or</hi> Ram. To him Hos-coll paid, as his heritage from his mother, Cam-ness-land, between Hawk-dale-water and the Ridge which goes from the fell down to the sea. Ram dwelt at Ram-stead. He had to wife Hall-weig, the daughter of Thor-grim of Thick-shaw, the sister of Arn-mod the Old. They had many children. Their son was Thor-kell, the father of Hall-dora, the mother of Gud-laug, the father of Thor-dis, the mother of Thord, [<hi>add.</hi>] the father of Sturla of Hwam. Grim was the son of Ram and Mar, Endride and Stan, Thor-leot and Eor-wend, Thor-kell, Stan-grim, Thor-berg, Atle, Arnor, Mar, Car, Cugalde; and daughters Berg-thora, Stan-unn, Riupa [Caper-cailzie], Finna, Ast-rid.

<p n=15.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Aud gave Thor-hild, daughter of Thor-stan the Red, to wife to Ey-stan Mein-fret, the son of Alf of Osta. Their son was Thord <hi>or</hi> Thor-rod, the father of Colban, the father of Thord the poet, and of <pb id=pb83a n=83>Alf-a-Dale. He had to wife Hall-dis, the daughter of Erp. Their son was Snorre, the father of Thor-gils Halla&apos;s son. The daughters of Alf-a-Dale were these: Thor-gerd, whom Are Mar&apos;s son had to wife, and Thor-elfa, whom Ha-were, the son of Einar, the son of Clepp <hi>or</hi> Clemp, had to wife. Their son <hi>was</hi> Thor-gar. Thor-wolf fox was also a son of Ey-stan&apos;s. He fell at Thing-ness-moot in the company of Thord Gelle, when he and Ord o&apos; Tongue fought. Hrapp was the name of the fourth son of Ey-stan.

<p n=15.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Aud gave Osc, Thor-stan&apos;s daughter, to Hall-stan-gode to wife. Their son was Thor-stan Surt [blank].

<p n=15.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Aud gave Wig-dis, Thor-stan&apos;s daughter, Campa-Grim to wife. Their daughter [was] Arn-borg <hi>or</hi> Erne-borg, whom As-wolf Flose of Head had to wife. Their children <hi>were</hi> Ord, and Wig-dis, whom Thor-gar Cadall&apos;s son [pr. Cathal&apos;s son] had to wife.

<p n=15.14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Aud brought up <hi rend=sc>Anlaf-feilan</hi>, the son of Thor-stan the Red. He took to wife Al-dis, the Barrey woman [Barra in the Hebrides], the daughter of Conal, the son of Stan-mod, the son of Aulwe Bairn-carle. The son of Conal was Stan-mod, the father of Hall-dora, whom Eilif, son of Cetil One-hand, had to wife.

<p>Their [viz. An-laf and Al-dis&apos;] children were Thord-Gelle and Thora. [<hi>A blank here, though none in MS., but it can be filled up as follows from the text as given in Laxdæla Saga</hi>, thus:] Thord-Gelle had to wife Hrod-ny, the daughter of Mid-frith Sceg. Their sons were Ey-wolf the Grey, Thor-arin Fyls-enni, and Thor-kell Cog.

<p>Ey-wolf the Grey had to wife..... Their sons were Thor-kell [Ari the historian&apos;s great-grandfather] and Balework....

<pb id=pb84a n=84><p>Thor-arin Fyls-enni had to wife Frid-gerd, the daughter of Thord of Head. Their son was Sceg <hi>or</hi> Beardie [and their daughter Wig-dis, whom Raven Limerick-farer had to wife.

<p>Thor-kell Cog had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of As-gar Eider-duck. Their son was Thor-stan,.....]

<p>Thora was the daughter of Anlaf Feilan, whom Thor-stan Torsk-biter, the son of Thor-wolf Moster-beardie, had to wife. She was the mother of Thor-grim, father of Snorre-gode, and of Borc the Fat, and of Mar, Hall-ward&apos;s son. Ingiold and Grim were [other] sons of Anlaf Feilan.

<p>Wig-dis was the name of the second daughter of Anlaf Feilan. [..........]

<p>Helga was the name of the third daughter of Anlaf [Feilan]. Gun-here, Hlif&apos;s son, had her to wife. Their daughter <hi>was</hi> Iofrid, whom Thor-ord, the son of Ord o&apos; Tongue, had to wife, and afterwards Thor-stan, Egil&apos;s son. Thor-unn <hi>or</hi> Thor-wen was another daughter of Gun-here, whom Her-stan, Blund-ketil&apos;s son, had to wife. Red and Haugud <hi>or</hi> Haug-wandel were the sons of Gun-here.

<p>Thor-rid was the name of the fourth daughter of Anlaf Feilan. Thor-arin, Rage&apos;s brother, had her to wife. Their daughter was Wig-dis, whom Stan Thor-arin&apos;s son of Red-mell had to wife.

<p n=15.15><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Aud was a worshipful lady. When she was well stricken in years, she bade to her house her kinsmen and sons-in-law, and prepared a costly feast for them. And when three nights of the feast were gone, then she gave gifts to her kinsfolk, and counselled them wise counsels; and she said that the feast should last other three nights, declaring that this should be her funeral feast <hi>or</hi> arval. The next night she died, and was buried on the shore, below high-water mark, as she had ordered it herself; for she did not wish to lie in unhallowed ground, seeing that she <pb id=pb85a n=85>was a baptized woman. But after this the faith of her kinsfolk went wrong [i.e. they turned heathens].


<p n=16.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ceallac</hi> was the name of a man <hi>who was</hi> the son of Beorn the Strong, the brother of Gib-leach, whom Beorn the Eastron had to wife. Ceallac went out to Iceland, and took land in settlement from Dæg-meal-ness to Clovening, and dwelt at Ceallac-stead. His sons were Helgi Roe and Thor-grim Tangle, under Fell; Eilif Prude [Brude], As-beorn Vodve of Ara-stead, Beorn Whale-maw of Toun-garth, Thor-stan Thynning, Gizar Glad of Scorra-wick, Thor-beorn Scro Fod of Cetil-stead; but his daughter <hi>was</hi> Asa of Swiney, the mother of Ey-wolf and Tin-forna [Tin...].

<p n=16.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Leot-wolf</hi> was the name of a freedman of Ceallac; Ceallac gave him a homestead at Leot-wolf-stead, inside Cold-cheek-[hill]. His sons were Thor-stan, and Beorn, and Hrafse. He was of giant-race on the mother&apos;s side. Leot-wolf was an iron-smith. They went out into Fell-shaw by Leot-wolf-stead, and Weevil, a friend of theirs, who dwelt at Weevil&apos;s-toft. Thor-unn of Thor-und&apos;s-toft was the mother of Ord-mere and the foster-mother of Ceallac the son of Beorn Whale-maw.

<p>Olof, the daughter of Thor-grim under Fell, became possessed with frenzy. <corr sic=Mar resp=errata>Men</corr> charged Rafse with having brought about this, but he [Rafse] took Ord-mere in her bed, who told him that he was the cause of it. Then Thor-grim gave him Feud-isle. Rafse said that he would smite Ord-mere upon her unless he gave the island in ransom; but <pb id=pb86a n=86>Ceallac would not part with the island. Rafse took their boat out of a turven ship-shed. Ceallac&apos;s sons went after them, and could not get up to them, upon which Eilif and his brothers attacked Hrafse in the island. [The text is here all broken up, and unintelligible.] Beorn Whale-maw slew Beorn, Leot-wolf&apos;s son, at the games. Leot-wolf and his son bribed Ord-mere that he should bring Beorn, Ceallac&apos;s son, within their reach. Ceallac the boy [Beorn&apos;s son] tripped along with him [his father], and he [Beorn] was not overcome till they caught the boy. They slew Ceallac [the boy] at Ceallac&apos;s-hillock; he was then seven years old. After this Ceallac&apos;s sons set upon Leot-wolf and Thor-stan [father and son] in the underground house [Ir. <hi>úaim éleaid</hi>] at Fell-shaw; and Eilif found the other outlet, and thus got behind them and slew them both.

<p>M: Hrafse went indoors at Ara-stead, when Ceallac was sitting over against the fire at a feast. Hrafse was in woman&apos;s clothes. He cut at Ceallac, but he cast his shield over him, and his arm broke, but he was not wounded. Hrafse went out by a door that was in the wall, and slew As-beorn, and then got away. The sons of Ceallac bought over Thord, Weevil&apos;s son, to bring Hrafse within their reach. He told Hrafse that his ox was lying in a pit. Thord was carrying his shield for him, and when he saw Ceallac&apos;s sons, he cast away the shield over to them; upon <pb id=pb87a n=87>which Hrafse grappled with Thord and cast him over the cliff, and that was the death of him. Then Ceallac&apos;s sons did not get the better of him till they knocked him down with long poles. Eilif sat by while they overcame him. [Here the great blank ends in H.]


<p n=17.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Heor-laf</hi>, king of the Hords, who was called the man of Quin [the county], had to wife Asa the Light. Their son was Utryg <hi>or</hi> Untrow, the father of U-blaud, the father of Hagene the White, the father of Wolf the Squinting. The second son of Heor-laf was king Half [Heah-wolf], that commanded the Champions o&apos; Half. His mother was Hilda the Slender, the daughter of Hagene of Niard-ey. King Half was the father of king Heor, who avenged his father upon Solwe, Hagene&apos;s son.

<p n=17.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> King Heor harried in the land of the Bearms [Perms]. There he took as his booty Liu-wine, the daughter of the king of the Bearms. She was left behind in Roga-land, while king Heor went forth to war; and it was then that she bore two sons, the one called Gar-mund, the other Heah-mund. They were very dark. At the same time her bondwoman bore a son; he was called Laf, the son of Shag-hood the thrall. Laf was white of skin, wherefore the queen changed children with the bond-woman, and took Laf as her own. But when the king came home, he did not like Laf, saying that he was puny. Next time the king went off on a wicking voyage, the queen asked Brage the poet to her house, and bade him to see what he thought of the boys. They were at that <pb id=pb88a n=88>time three winters old. She shut them up in the hall with Bragi, and hid herself in the daïs. Bragi repeated these words:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>Twain are here whom I trust well,
    <l>Heah-mund and Gar-mund, Heor&apos;s children;
    <l>But Laf the third, Shag-hood&apos;s son,
    <l>A bondwoman bore him: no greater craven will there be.
</lg>

                <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 360, No. 15.]


<p n=17.2.1>He struck with his staff the daïs where the queen was. When the king came home she told him this, and showed him her own sons. He said he had never seen such Hell-skins, and both brothers were ever afterwards so called.

<p n=17.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-mund Hell-skin</hi> was a host-king. He used to harry west on wicking cruises, and he had a kingdom in Roga-land. But at the time when he left off the way of warfare in which he had long been, king Harold Fairhair had fought a battle in Hafr&apos;s-frith against Eiric, king of the Hords, and Sulce, king of Roga-land, and Ceotwa the Wealthy, and had gotten the victory, and laid all Roga-land under himself, and drove out therefrom many men away from their heritage. And Gar-mund could see no way to get any honour there; wherefore he took counsel to go out to Iceland. On the voyage with him were Wolf-squint, his cousin, and Stan-wolf the Low, the son of Hrod-wolf the herse <hi>or</hi> lord of Agd, and of Andott sister of Aulwe Bairn-carle.

<p>Gar-mund and Wolf and Stan-wolf kept company at sea, each commanding <pb id=pb89a n=89>his own ship. They made Broad-frith, and lay off Ellida-ey, and then they heard that the south of the frith was settled; but the west part little or not at all. Gar-mund put in to Middle-fell-strand, and took land in settlement from Fa-ban&apos;s-river to Cloven-stone. He landed at Gar-mund&apos;s-voe, and stayed the first winter at Booth-dale.

<p>Stan-wolf took land in settlement from Cloven-stone, and Wolf on the west of the frith, as shall be told.

<p>Gar-mund thought his settlement too small. He kept up a great estate, and many men about him, so that he had eighty freedmen. He dwelt at Gar-mund-stead, under Sheard [Pass].

<p n=17.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> There was a man called <hi rend=sc>Throwend Slim-leg</hi>. He went out to Iceland with Gar-mund Hell-skin. His race came out of Agd.

<p>Throwend took in settlement the islands to the west of Bearney-floe, and dwelt at Flat-ey. He had to wife the daughter of Gils Galley-neb. Their son was Her-gils Napp-raz, who dwelt in Hergils-ey. The daughter of Her-gils was Thor-katla, whom Mar of Reek-hillock had to wife. Her-gils had to wife Thor-erna, the daughter of Cetil Broad-sole. Ingiald was their son. He dwelt at Hergils-ey, and sheltered Gisle, Sour&apos;s son; for which Borc the Fat got the islands from him by law; but he bought Lither in Torsk-frith. His son was Thor-arin, that had to wife Thor-gerd, the daughter of Glum, Gara&apos;s son; and their son was Helga Stan-here. Thor-arin was with Ceartan in Swine-dale when he fell.

<p n=17.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Throwend Slim-leg was dwelling in Flat-ey when Ord-scraute <pb id=pb90a n=90>[pie-bald] and Thore, his son, came out to Iceland. They took land in settlement in Torsk-frith. Ord dwelt at Shaw; but Thore went abroad again, and was a warring. He won much gold in Fin-mark. With him was the son of Hall of Temple-stead. And when they came to Iceland Hall summoned him over the gold, and there arose great feuds over it, wherefrom the <hi>History of the Torsk-frith-folk</hi> is made.

<p>Gold Thore dwelt at Thore-stead and was a very mighty man of valour. He had to wife Inge-borg, the daughter of Gils Galley-neb. Their son was Gud-mund.

<p n=17.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Gar-mund went westward to the Strands, and took land in settlement from Gull-peak west to the Horn, and thence east to Stream-ness. There he set up four homesteads: one in Ethel-wick, which his reeve looked after: another in Cearan&apos;s-wick, which Cearan, his thrall, took care of: the third at the West-commons, which his thrall Beorn took care of; which Beorn was outlawed for sheep-stealing when Gar-mund was dead and gone, and his property was taken as a fine and made Commons: a fourth homestead Gar-mund had at Bard&apos;s-wick, which Atle, his thrall, took care of, and he had twelve thralls under him. And when Gar-mund went about between his homesteads, he always had eighty men with him. He was very wealthy in chattels, and also in live stock. Men say that his swine walked in Swine-ness, and his sheep on Herd-ness, and he had his shielings at Bitter. Some say that he had also a homestead in Shiel-river-dale at Gar-mund&apos;s-stead in Stan-grim&apos;s-frith. Wise men say that he was the most nobly-born of all the settlers <pb id=pb91a n=91>in Iceland. But he had little feud or war with other men, because he was old when he came to Iceland. Ceallac and he had a quarrel over the land that lies between Cloven-ing and Faban&apos;s-river. Both wished to have it, but Gar-mund had the best of it. Beorn the Eastron, and West-here of Eyre, set them at one. West-here landed in West-here&apos;s-ness when he went to meet Gar-mund.

<p>Gar-mund hid much treasure in Duck-pit under Sheard. He had to wife Here-rid, daughter of Geat, Geat-ric&apos;s son, the open-handed. Their daughter was Yr [ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ], whom Cetil [Cathal] had to wife. Their sons were Thor-hall and Orde, father of Hall-were, whom Borc, the son of Thor-mod, Thiost-here&apos;s son, had to wife.

<p>But afterward Gar-mund had to wife Thor-catla, daughter of U-fey, Thor-wolf&apos;s son. Their children were Gar-rid and [blank in MS. for name].

<p>Gar-mund died at Gar-mund-stead, and there he is howed in a ship in a wood there, a little way out from the house.

<p>Gar-mund gave Hrod-wolf, Ceallac&apos;s son, his friend, a homestead at Ballar-water. His sons were Illuge the Red, and Solwe, the father of Thord.


<p n=18.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Stan-wolf the Low</hi>, the son of Hrod-wolf, the herse of Agd, took land in settlement inward up from Cloven-stone to Grit-field-mull, and dwelt in Fair-dale at Stan-wolf&apos;s-shelf. He walked inland, then up on to a mountain, and saw inland there a great dale all grown with wood. He could perceive one clearing in the dale; and <pb id=pb92a n=92>there he built him a homestead, and called it Sower-by; for it was very swampy, and he called the whole dale by that name&mdash;Sower-by. It is now called Turf-ness where the homestead was made. Stan-wolf had to wife Erny [ ? ], Thidrand&apos;s daughter. Thor-stan the franklin was their son, and Ern-dis the Wealthy was their daughter, the mother of Thord, the father of Thor-gerd, whom Ord had to wife. Their son was Raven the Hlymrec-farer [Limerick-farer], who had to wife Wig-dis, daughter of Thor-arin Fyls-enni. Their son was Snort, the father of Iodis, whom Ey-wolf, Hall-beorn&apos;s son, had to wife. Their daughter was Halla, whom Atle, Tanne&apos;s son, had to wife. Their daughter was Yng-unn, whom Snorre, Hun-bow&apos;s son, had to wife.

<p n=18.1.1>Stan-wolf lost three swine, and they were found two winters later in Swine-dale, and they were then thirty together.

<p n=18.1.2>Stan-wolf also took in settlement Stan-wolf&apos;s-dale in Crook&apos;s-frith.

<p n=18.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> There was a man called <hi rend=sc>Sleight-Beorn</hi>. He had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Stan-wolf the Low. He took in settlement by Stan-wolf&apos;s rede the West-dale in Sower-by.  He dwelt at Slight Beorn-stead, up above Thwart-fell. His son was Theod-ric, that had to wife Arn-gerd, daughter of Thor-beorn, Shield-beorn&apos;s son. Their son was Slaughter Sturla, who set up a homestead at Stead-hillock; and [also] Cnot, the father of As-gar, and Thor-beorn, and Theod-ric, after whom the borg <hi>or</hi> bury is called on Coll-frith&apos;s-heath. Theod-ric, Sleight Beorn&apos;s son, thought it was too crowded in Sower-by; so he went off to Ice-frith, whence comes the <hi>History of Thor-beorn and Ha-ward the Halt</hi>.

<pb id=pb93a n=93><p n=18.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>An-laf Bag</hi>, whom Worm the Slim drove abroad out of An-laf&apos;s-wick, took in settlement Bag-dale, and dwelt in Bag-stead, before Theod-ric and his fellows drove him away. Then he took land in settlement inland from Grit-field-mull, and dwelt at An-laf-dale. His son was Thor-wald, who, by reason of an action for sheep-stealing brought by Thor-arin Giallandi [  ?  ], gave it over by covenant to Og-mund, Wala-Stan&apos;s son, wherefore Thor-arin slew Og-mund at the Torsk-frith&apos;s moot.

<p n=18.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gils Galley-neb</hi> took in settlement Gils-frith, between Anlaf&apos;s-dale and Crook&apos;s-frith-mull. He dwelt at Cliffs. His son was Hedin, the father of Hall-dor, the Garp-dale gode, the father of Thor-wald of Garp&apos;s-dale, who had to wife Gud-run, Os-wif&apos;s daughter.

<p n=18.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-arin Crook</hi> took in settlement Crook&apos;s-frith up to Hafr-fell [He-goat-fell] from Crook-frith&apos;s-ness. He had a feud with Stan-wolf the Low over Stan-wolf&apos;s-dale, and rowed after him with twenty [ten] men as he was going away from his shielings with seven men. They fought by Fair-dale-water-mouth on the eyre; and while they were fighting there came men up from the house to help Stan-wolf; and Thor-arin Crook fell there and four of his men, and seven of Stan-wolf&apos;s men. Their barrows are there.

<p n=18.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil Broad-sole</hi> took in settlement Bear-frith. <hi>He was</hi> the son of Thor-beorn Talcni [gills]. His daughter was Thor-arna, whom Her-gils Hnapp-raz had to wife; as it is written before.

<p n=18.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Throw-end Slim-leg had to wife the daughter of Gils Galley-neb. Their daughter was Thor-arna, whom Hrod-wolf, the son of Helge the Lean, had to wife. Thor-berg Cog-breast was another daughter of Gils <pb id=pb94a n=94>Galley-neb. Here-fin was the name of his son, and he dwelt in Crook&apos;s-frith.


<p n=19.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>19.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wolf Squint</hi>, the son of Hagene the White, took in settlement all Reek-ness between Torsk-frith and Hafr-fell. He had to wife Borg, the daughter of Ey-wind Eastron, the sister of Helge the Lean. Their son was Atle the Red, who had to wife Thor-berg, the sister of Stan-wolf the Low. Their son was Mar of Reek-hillock, who had to wife Thor-katla, the daughter of Her-gils Hnapp-raz. Their son was Are.

<p n=19.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He was drifted by the sea to <hi rend=sc>White-man-land</hi>, which some call Great Ireland. It lies west of the main [ocean], near <hi rend=sc>Wine-land the Good</hi>. It is said to be six days&apos; sail west from Ireland. Are could not get away from there, and he was baptized there. The first who told this story was Raven the Limerick-farer, who had long been in Limerick in Ireland. Thor-kell Gelleson said that an Icelander told [him] that he had heard from Thor-fin, earl in the Orkneys, that Are had been recognised in <hi rend=sc>White-man-land</hi>, but could not get away thence, although he was held in great esteem there.

<p n=19.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Are had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Alf-a-Dale. Their son was Thor-gils, and [also] Guth-laf and Illugi. This is the family of the <hi>Reek-ness-folk</hi>.

<p n=19.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Iorund</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Eor-wend</hi> was the name of a son of Wolf Squint. He had to wife Thor-berg Cog-breast. Their daughter was Theod-hild, <pb id=pb95a n=95>whom Eric the Red had to wife. Their son was Laf the Lucky of Greenland.

<p n=19.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Iorund or Eor-wend was the name of a son of Atle the Red. He had to wife Thor-dis, daughter of Thor-gar Seethe. Their daughter was Ord-katla, whom Thor-gils Coll&apos;s son had to wife. Iorund was the father of Snorre.


<p n=20.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>20.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hall-stan</hi>, the son of Thor-wolf Moster-beardie, took in settlement Torsk-frith-strand, and dwelt at Hall-stan-ness. He sacrificed to Thunder for him to send him a pair of porch-pillars, and offered his son therefore; and afterward there came a tree [drifted ashore] to his land that was 60 [MS. 63] ells long and two fathoms thick. It was used for porch-pillars, and there were made out of it porch-pillars for every homestead in the Thwart-friths. The place is now called Pine-tree-ness where this tree came ashore.

<p n=20.1.1>Hall-stan had harried in Scotland, and there he took the thralls which he brought out to Iceland. He sent them to salt-working in the Sweveneys. There Hall-stan&apos;s thralls had ... [corrupt, and something missing; the thralls ran away, and he came upon them sleeping and slew them].

<p n=20.1.2>Hall-stan had to wife Osc, the daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Their son was Thor-stan Swart, who discovered the Summer-Eking [intercalation]. Thor-stan Swart had to wife [blank]. Their son was Thor-arin, and their daughters Thor-dis, whom Thor-kell Trefil had to wife, and Osc, whom Stan the far-sailor had to wife. Thor-stan White was <pb id=pb96a n=96>the name of their son. Sam [Saomi, i.e. Fin] was the son of Thor-stan Swart, a bastard. He had a feud with Trefil over the heritage of Thor-stan, because he [Trefil] tried to get hold of the heritage for Thor-arin&apos;s children.

<p n=20.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Loke</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Bead-mod of Scut. He went to Iceland, and took in settlement Deep-frith and Gruoch-ness, up to Gowe-frith. His son was Thor-gils of Thor-gils-stead in Deep-frith, the father of Coll, who had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thore, the son of earl Hallad, the son of Rogn-wald earl of More. Their son was Thor-gils, who had to wife Ot-katla, daughter of Ear-wend, the son of Atle the Red. Their son was Iorund. He had to wife Hall-weig, the daughter of Ord, the son of Yra and Cetil Gowe. Snorre was a son of Iorund, who had to wife Asny, daughter of Slaughter-Sturla. Their son was Gils, who had to wife Thor-dis, the daughter of Gud-laug and of Thor-katla, the daughter of Hall-dor, the son of Snorre <hi>gode</hi>; but the son of Gils was Thord, that had to wife Wig-dis, Swerting&apos;s daughter.

<p n=20.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil Gowe</hi> [Cathal Gobhan] was the name of a man <hi>who was</hi> the son of Aurlyg, the son of Bead-were, the son of Wig-stark. Aurlyg had to wife Signy, Oblaud&apos;s [Un-blate] daughter, the sister of Hagene the White. Cetil their son came out late in the times of the Settlement. He had been west on wicking cruises, and had gotten Irish thralls in Ireland. The one was called Thor-mod [Diarmaid]; the second Floce; the others Core and Swart [Dubh], and two named Score. Cetil took in settlement Walrus-ness, and abode there the first winter at Gowe-hall, but when the spring came he went inward to a ness, and abode there at Gowe-ness the second winter.

<pb id=pb97a n=97><p n=20.3.1>Score the elder and Floce ran away with two women and much chattels. They were in hiding in Score&apos;s-holt; but they were slain in Floce-dale and Score-dale.

<p n=20.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Cetil found no place for a homestead in the Ness, but went east into Borg-frith, and abode the third winter at Gowe-hall. Early in the spring he went east into Broad-frith to seek him a place for a homestead; and there he stayed at Gar-mund-stead, and asked for Yra, the daughter of Gar-mund, to wife, and took her to wife. And then Gar-mund showed Cetil land west of the Frith.

<p n=20.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Cetil&apos;s thralls ran away out of Snow-fells-ness, and reached Lamb-stead in the dead of the night. Thord, the son of Thor-gar Lambe and of Thor-dis, the daughter of Ynga-here, the sister of Egil, Scald Grim&apos;s son, was living there at that time. The thralls set fire to the house, and burnt to death Thord and all his household. Moreover they broke into an out-house <hi>or</hi> store-house there, and took out great stores of money and chattels, and got the horses home and loaded them with their packs, and turned up the path to Elfet&apos;s-ness. Lambe the Strong, the son of Thord, was coming back from the Moot early the next morning, just after they had got away. He set out after them, and his men with him; but when the thralls perceived this, they ran every man his own way. Cetil and his men took Core in Core&apos;s-ness, and some took to swimming. They caught Swart [Dubh] on Swart&apos;s-reef, and Score in Scor-ey, and Thor-mod [Diarmaid] on Thor-mod&apos;s-reef, a mile from land.

<pb id=pb98a n=98><p n=20.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Cetil-Gowe took in settlement Gowe-frith and Hall-ness up to Coll-frith. Cetil and Yra had two sons; one was Thor-hall, the father of Hall-ware, whom Borc, the son of Thor-mod, Thiost-here&apos;s son, had to wife; and another was Orde, who had to wife Thor-laug, daughter of Hrod-wolf of Ballar-water, and Thor-rid, daughter of Wal-theow, the son of Aur-lyg of Eisa-berg.

<p n=20.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Coll O&apos; Temple</hi>, the son of Hrod-wald, took in settlement Coll&apos;s-frith and Quigand-ness and Quigand-frith, and sold his settlement to divers men; but he went into Lax-water-dale to Hos-Coll-stead. He was called Coll-a-Dale. His son was Hos-Coll, who had to wife Hall-frid, the daughter of Beorn, who took Beorn-frith in settlement to the north of Stan-grim&apos;s-frith. Their son was Thor-laic, father of the Bolle that had to wife Os-wif&apos;s daughter, Gud-run.

<p n=20.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cniuc</hi>, the son of Thor-wolf Sparrow, was called Cniuc o&apos; the Nesses. He took in settlement all the ness to Bard&apos;s-strand from Quigand-frith, and dwelt at [blank]. He had to wife Eya [Ewia], the daughter of Ingi-ald, the son of Helge the Lean. Their children were Einar, the father of Stan-wolf Birting, the father of Sal-gerd, the mother of Bard the Black; and Ey-wolf, who was step-father of Thor-borg Coal-brow, the daughter of Glum, whom Thor-mod made verses on. Thor-grim was also Ey-wolf&apos;s son, the father of Yngw-hild, whom Wolf-hedin of Wood-moor had to wife, and Thora, the mother of Cniuc o&apos; Mires in Deer-frith. He was the father of Thor-geat, the father of Stan-wolf, the father of Thor-kel [<hi>lat. add.</hi>], the father of Halla, the <pb id=pb99a n=99>mother of Stein-unn, the mother of Raven, Swegen-Beorn&apos;s son, and of Her-dis, that Hall Gizor&apos;s son, the Law-speaker, had to wife.

<p n=20.8.1>S: Another son of Cniuc&apos;s was Einar, the father of Stan-wolf, the father of Sal-gerd, the mother of Bard the Black. Thora was the name of Cniuc&apos;s daughter, whom Thor-wald, the son of Thord Wicking&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son was Cniuc o&apos; Mires, the father of Thor-geat, the father of Stan-wolf, the father of Halla, the mother of Stein-unn, the mother of Raven of Eyre. Cniuc had to wife Evia, daughter of Ingiald, the son of Helge the Lean. Their son was Ey-wolf, the father of Thor-grim, Catla&apos;s son. Grim had Catla to wife first, and their daughter was Thor-borg Coal-brow, whom Thor-mod made verses on. Stan-grim was the name of Thor-grim&apos;s son; he was the father of Yngw-hild, whom Wolf-hedin of Wood-moor had to wife.

<p n=20.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-stan Cealce</hi> [jaw-bone] took in settlement Cealce&apos;s-frith and Herd-ness, by counsel <hi>or</hi> rede of Cniuc. His son was Thor-gils, the father of Stan the Danish, [<hi>lat. add.</hi>] the father of Wig-dis, the mother of Thor-unn, the mother of Thor-gar, the father of abbot Thor-fin.

<p n=20.9.1>S: His [Cealce&apos;s] son was Thor-gils, who had to wife Thora, the daughter of West-here of Eyre. Their son <hi>was</hi> Stan the Danish. He had to wife Hall-gerd, the daughter of Arn-ulf, the son of Arn-mod the Red. Arn-ulf had to wife Wig-dis, the daughter of [space of ten letters]. Wig-dis was the name of the daughter of Stan the Danish and of Hall-gerd, whom Illuge, Stan-beorn&apos;s son, had to wife. Their daughter was Thor-unn, the mother of Thor-gar Long-head.


<pb id=pb100a n=100><p n=21.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>21.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-laf</hi>, the son of Eiric, the son of Hagene the White, took in settlement Bard-strand, between Water-frith and Berg-lithe. He was father of Ord-laf and of Helge Scarf. Ord-laf was the father of Guest the Sage, and of Thor-stan, and of Asa, whom Thor-gils, the son of Grim of Grim-ness, had to wife. Their sons were Ior-wend of Mid-eng and Thor-arin of Bur-fell. The children of Guest were these: Thord and Halla, whom Snorre, the son of Alf-a-Dale, had to wife. Their son was Thor-gils. Another daughter of Guest&apos;s was Thor-ey, whom Thor-gils had to wife. Thor-arin was their son, the father of Iodis, the mother of Illuge, the father of Birna, the mother of Arn-thoror and Ey-wind.

<p>Gar-laf had to wife Iora, the daughter of Helge. The third son of Gar-laf was called Thor-fin. He had to wife Gud-run, the daughter of As-wolf. Thor-stan, Ord-laf&apos;s son, was the father of Is-gerd, whom Bale-werk, the son of Ey-wolf the Grey, had to wife. Their son was Gelle the Law-speaker. We-ny was yet another daughter of Thor-stan. <hi>She was</hi> the mother of Thord Crow-neb. Thence the <hi rend=sc>Crow-neblings</hi> are come.

<p n=21.1.1>S: Helge Scrap was the father of Thor-borg, the mother of Katla, whom Thor-stan, Sal-mund&apos;s son, had to wife. Their sons were Ref [Fox] of Brynie-dale, and Thord, the father of Illuge, the father of Hrod-ny, whom Thor-grim Burner had to wife.

<p>Thor-dis was the name of another daughter of Helge Scrap. Thor-stan, As-beorn&apos;s son of Kirkby in the East, had her to wife. Their son was Swart, the father of Sigh-wat the Law-speaker. <pb id=pb101a n=101>Gar-laf had to wife Iora, Helge&apos;s daughter. Thor-fin was the name of the third son of Gar-laf. He had to wife Gud-run, As-wolf&apos;s daughter. As-mund was the name of their son. He had to wife Hall-catla, the daughter of Beorn, the son of Mar, the son of As-mund. Hlenne was the name of their son. He had to wife Egi-leiva, the daughter of Thor-stan, Crapla&apos;s son. Their son was Thor-fin, the father of Thor-gar Long-head.

<p n=21.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> M: <hi rend=sc>Groa</hi> [Gruoch] <hi rend=sc>the Christian</hi> was the daughter of Gar-laf, the mother of Helge, the father of Os-wif, the father of Gud-run, the mother of Bolle, the father of Her-dis, the mother of Codran.

<p n=21.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arn-mod the Red</hi>, Thor-beorn&apos;s son, the foster-brother <hi>or</hi> sworn brother of Gar-laf, took in settlement Red-sand. His sons were these: Ern-ulf and Thor-beorn, the father of Hrod-wolf the Red-sand-man.

<p n=21.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf Sparrow</hi> came out with Aurlyg, and took in settlement Patrick&apos;s-frith on the west, and Wick on the west of Bard, save Colfs-wick, where Coll, Aurlyg&apos;s sworn brother, dwelt. Thor-wolf also took in settlement Kevel-wick to the south of Bard, and dwelt at Whale-lair. Cniuc o&apos; Nesses, and Ing-wolf the Strong, and Gar-theow were the sons of Thor-wolf Sparrow. Thor-arna, whom Thor-stan, Ord-laf&apos;s son, had to wife, was a daughter of Ing-wolf&apos;s.

<p n=21.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Talcne</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Scuma</hi>, sons of Bead-were Bladder-pate, came out to Iceland with Aurlyg. They took in settlement half Patrick&apos;s-frith and all Talcne-frith to Cub-ness.

<p n=21.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil Broad-sole</hi>, the son of Thor-beorn Talcne, took in settlement <pb id=pb102a n=102>all the dales from Cub-ness to Dufan&apos;s-dale. He gave Thor-erna his daughter to Her-gils Hnapp-raz. Then Cetil went south into Broad-frith, and took in settlement Bear-frith beside Reek-ness.


<p n=22.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>22.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Erne</hi> was the name of a nobleman. He was a kinsman of Gar-mand Hell-skin. He came out from Roga-land because of the oppression of king Harold. He took in settlement all Erne-frith. He abode at Tilt-ness through the winter, because the sun did not set in the short days there.

<p n=22.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>An Red-cloak</hi>, the son of Grim Hairy-chin of Ravenist, and the son of Helga, the daughter of An the Bow-swayer, fell out with king Harold Fairhair, and therefore he went out of the country west on a wicking cruise. He harried in Ireland, and took to wife there Grelad [Gré-liath], the daughter of earl Beart-mar [Great-deed?]. He and his wife went to Iceland, and put into Arne-frith a winter later than Erne. An stayed the first winter in Dufan&apos;s-dale. Grelad thought the earth smelt bad there. Erne got news of High-mund Hell-skin, his kinsman, north in Ey-frith, and yearned to go thither. So he sold An Red-cloak all his land between Lang-ness and Steep, and he set up a homestead at Eyre; and there Grelad thought she could smell the honey in the grass.

<p n=22.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Dufan</hi> [Dubhan] was a [thrall] freedman <hi>or</hi> thrall of An&apos;s. He gave him Dufan&apos;s-dale. Beart-mar was the son of An, and the father of the two We-guests and of Helge, the father of Thor-rid, the mother of Arn-katla, whom Helge, Ey-wolf&apos;s son, had to wife. <pb id=pb103a n=103>Thor-hild was a daughter of Beart-mar, whom We-stan, Wegar&apos;s son, had to wife. Ead <hi>or</hi> Aud and We-stan were their children.

<p n=22.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Heallcar</hi> [Ealcmhar?] was a freedman of An&apos;s. His son was Beorn, Beart-mar&apos;s thrall. Beart-mar gave Beorn his freedom; then he grew rich. We-gest had a quarrel with him over it, and thrust a spear through him; but Beorn dealt him his death blow with a spade.

<p n=22.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-theow</hi>, Wal-theow&apos;s son, further took in settlement land in Erne-frith, Force-frith, Reek-frith, Trostan&apos;s-frith, Gar-theow&apos;s-frith, and all up to Lang-ness, and dwelt in Gar-theow&apos;s-frith. He had to wife Sal-gerd, daughter of Wolf Squint. Their son was Hagene, the father of Atle, the father of Hos-Coll, the father of Atle, the father of Bard the Swarthy, [<hi>lat. add.</hi>] the father of Swegen-Beorn, the father of Raven, the father of Stein-unn, the mother of sir Raven.

<p n=22.5.1>S: Their son was Hagene. He had to wife Aud <hi>or</hi> Ead, the daughter of An-laf Even-Coll and of Thora, Gund-stan&apos;s daughter. Atle was their son. He had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thor-laf, the son of Ey-wind Cnee and Thor-rid Ram-sow. Thor-laf had to wife Gro [Gruoch], the daughter of Thor-wolf Breech.

<p>Hos-Coll was the son of Atle [and] the father of Bard the Swarthy.

<p n=22.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eiric</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Well-dale on the south of Deer-frith and Sletta-ness to Steep in Erne-frith, and up to the Upper Neck in Deer-frith. He was the father of Thor-kel, the father of Thord, the father of Thor-kel, the father of Stein-wolf, the father of Thord, [<hi>lat. add.</hi>] the father of Thor-leva, the mother of Thora, the mother of Gud-mund Gris, who had to wife Sol-weig, daughter of <pb id=pb104a n=104>John Loptsson. Their children were Magnus <hi>gode</hi> and Thor-lac, the father of bishop Arne and Thora, the mother of earl Gizor.

<p n=22.6.1>S: [<hi>lat. add.</hi>] Thor-laf was the mother of Liny, the mother of Cecilia, the mother of Bard and of Thor-gerd, whom Beorn the English had to wife. Their children were these: Arnis the abbot, and Thora, whom Amund Thor-garsson had to wife.

<p n=22.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>We-stan</hi>, the son of We-gar, the brother of We-beorn the Sogns-champion, took land in settlement between the Halses <hi>or</hi> Necks in Deer-frith, and dwelt in Hawk-dale. He had to wife Thor-hild, Beart-mar&apos;s daughter. Their children were We-stan and Aud.

<p n=22.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Sour</hi> came out when the land was all settled. We-stan gave him half Hawk-dale. His children were these: Gisle, who had to wife We-stan&apos;s daughter; and Thor-kell, that had to wife Sigrid, Sleight-Beorn&apos;s daughter; and Are; and [daughter] Thor-dis, whom Thor-grim, Thor-stan&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son was Snorre <hi>gode</hi>.

<p>S: Afterwards Barc the Fat had Thor-dis to wife. Their daughter <hi>was</hi> Thor-rid, whom Thor-beorn the Fat had to wife, and afterwards Thor-ord the Tribute-buyer. Their son was Ceartan of Frod-water.


<p n=23.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>23.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Deer</hi> was the name of a man, a noble, that came out from South-Moor to Iceland by the counsel of earl Rogn-wald. He took in settlement Deer-frith, and dwelt at the Necks. His son was Raven, that dwelt at Cetil&apos;s-eyre, the father of Thor-rid, whom We-stan, We-stan&apos;s son, had to wife. Their sons were Berg and Helge.

<p n=23.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thord</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Wicking, whom most <pb id=pb105a n=105>men declare to have been the son of king Harold Fairhair. To him, Deer gave land between Mound in Hialle-ness and Earth-fall-gill, and he dwelt at All-weather. He had to wife Theod-hild, the daughter of Ey-wind Easterling, and the sister of Helge the Lean. Their son was Thor-kell Champion the Wealthy, who dwelt there afterwards. His sons were Thord Left-hand and Ey-wolf, father of Gisle, who had to wife Hall-gerd, daughter of Wer-mund the Slim. Their son was Brand, the father of Gud-mund the priest of Herd-holt, the father of Magnus the priest; and their daughter was Thora, whom Brand, Thor-hard&apos;s son, had to wife. Their children were Stan-wor, the mother of Rand-weig, the mother of Sea-hild, whom Gizer the bishop had to wife. Helgi was the name of another son of Ey-wolf. His children were these: Olaf and Gud-leva, whom Firth- <hi>or</hi> Fish-Fin had to wife.

<p n=23.2.1>Thor-wald the White was the name of another son of Thord-Wicking&apos;s son. He had to wife Thora, Cniuc&apos;s daughter. Their son was Thord the White <hi>or</hi> Left-hand, who had to wife As-dis, Thor-mod&apos;s daughter, the mother of Wolf the Marshal <hi>or</hi> Staller. The daughter of Thord Left-hand was Ord-catla [MS. Ott-katla], whom Sturla, Theod-rec&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son was Thord, who had to wife Hallbera, the daughter of Snorre <hi>gode</hi>. Asny was a daughter of Sturla, whom Snorri, Iorund&apos;s son, had to wife. [<hi>Lat. add.</hi>] Their daughter was Thor-dis, the mother of Hos-Coll the Leech, the father of Margaret, the mother of abbot Thor-finn.

<p n=23.2.2><hi rend=sc>S: Cniuc o&apos; the Nesses.</hi> Their son was Cniuc o&apos; the Fens <hi>or</hi> Mires, the father of Thor-geat, the father of Stan-wolf, who had to wife Her-dis, Tinn&apos;s daughter. Their children were these: Thor-kell <pb id=pb106a n=106>o&apos; Mire and Halla, whom Thord, Ord-laf&apos;s son, had to wife. Another son of Thor-wald the White was Thord Left-hand, who had to wife As-dis, the daughter of Thor-grim, Hardref&apos;s son. The mother of As-dis was Rand-weig, the daughter of Grit-gard, earl of Lathe. As-dis was the mother of Wolf the Staller, and the sister of Leot the Sage, and of Hall-dis, whom Thor-beorn, Theod-rec&apos;s son, had to wife. The daughter of her and of Thord Left-hand was Ott-katla, whom Sturla, Theod-rec&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son was Thord, who had to wife Hall-bera, the daughter of Snorre <hi>gode</hi>. Their daughter was Thor-rid, whom Haf-lide, Mar&apos;s son, had to wife. Snorri was the son of Thord, Sturla&apos;s son, who had to wife Ord-borg, the daughter of Grim, Lod-mund&apos;s son. Their children were Fly-Grim and Hall-bera, whom Mac-Snorri had to wife. The daughters of Sturla were six. One was Asny, whom Snorre, Iorund&apos;s son, had to wife. Their daughter was Thor-dis, the mother of Hos-Coll the Leech. The son of Snorre and As-ny was Gils, the father of Thord.

<p n=23.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ingiald</hi>, Bruni&apos;s son, took in settlement Ingiald&apos;s-sand, between Shelf-ness and Un-fare [i. e. Impasse]. He was the father of Hardref, the father of Thor-grim, the father of Leot the Sage (and his sisters), as was written above.


<p n=24.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>24.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Leot the Sage</hi> dwelt at Ingold&apos;s-sand, the son of Thor-grim, Hard-ref&apos;s son, but his mother was Rand-weig, the daughter of earl Grit-gard. Thor-grim Gagar [hound] was the son of Leot. Hall-dis, one of Leot&apos;s sisters, Thor-beorn Theod-ric&apos;s son had to <pb id=pb107a n=107>wife; and As-dis, Leot&apos;s other sister, Ospac Os-wif&apos;s son carried off, for which crime Leot got Ospac outlawed. Wolf was the name of their son. Leot brought him up.

<p n=24.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Grim Quiver</hi> dwelt at Brink. His sons were these: Sigurd and Thor-kell, manikins and small. Leot&apos;s foster-son was named Thor-arin. Leot bought butcher&apos;s meat of Grim for twenty hundred, and paid for them with a meadow watered by the brook that ran between their lands, and was called <hi>Gersemi</hi> [Jewel]. Grim turned the brook on his own meadow, and trenched through Leot&apos;s lands; and he brought an action against him therefore, and there was anger between them.

<p n=24.2.1>Leot took up with an Eastman at Waddle, who had set his heart upon As-dis. Guest Ord-lafsson came to a harvest-feast at Leot&apos;s. Thither came Egil, Sibyl-stan&apos;s son, and prayed Guest to give him some helping counsel, whereby his father might be lightened of the deadly grief that he was in for his son Ag-mund. [<hi>Something missing.</hi>] Guest made the beginning of <hi rend=sc>The Praise of Ag-mund</hi>. [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 62, ll. 17&ndash;20.]

<p n=24.2.2>Leot asked Guest what kind of man Thor-grim Gagar [hound] would turn out. Guest answered that his foster-son Thor-arin would be the most famous man; and he bade Thor-arin to take care, lest the hair that lay on his tongue should coil about his head. Leot thought these slighting words; but next morning he asked what was to come to Thor-grim. Guest said that Wolf, his sister&apos;s son [Wolf the Staller], <pb id=pb108a n=108>would be the more famous man. Then Leot grew wroth; but yet he rode out and put Guest on his way, and asked him, &lsquo;What will be my death?&rsquo; Guest said that he could not forestall his doom, but bade him keep on good terms with his neighbours. Leot asked, &lsquo;Shall these earth-lice, the sons of Grim-Quiver, be the death of me?&rsquo; &lsquo;Sore bites the starving louse,&rsquo; quoth Guest. &lsquo;Where will it be?&rsquo; asked Leot. &lsquo;Near here,&rsquo; said Guest.

<p n=24.2.3>The Eastman was helping Guest up to the Heath, and holding him steady on his horse, and the horse stumbled under him. Then said Guest, &lsquo;A piece of luck hath befallen thee now, and very soon another shall befall thee; but take heed that it turn not to thy unluck.&rsquo; The Eastman found buried money, upon which he went home, and took twenty pennies of it, and meant to go and fetch the rest later; but when he sought for it again, he could not find it; but Leot caught him as he was digging, and made him pay 300 for every penny [he had found].

<p n=24.2.4>That harvest-tide Thor-beorn, Theod-ric&apos;s son, was slain.

<p n=24.2.5>In the spring Leot was sitting on a mound watching his thralls at work; he was in a cloak, and the hood thereof was strung about his neck, and one sleeve on. The sons of Quiver sprang up on the hillock, and both cut at him together, and after that Thor-kell pulled the hood over his head. Leot said they were wicked neighbours; and they tumbled off the hillock on to the path by which Guest had ridden, and there Leot died. The sons of Grim went to Haward the Halts. Ey-wolf the Gray and Stan-grim his son sheltered them<note n=1 id=n108.1>The writer of the second half of Haward Saga, who must have had before him a better text than ours, gives this account of Leot and Thorbeorn&apos;s quarrel:&mdash;Thorbeorn was the name of a man that lived at the place called Eyre. He was a wealthy <pb>man in chattels and was fallen into the decline of years, and a close man in his disposition. He had two sons; the one named Grim, the other Thorstan. It is told so, that Leot and Thorbeorn owned in common [lit. both together] a water-meadow [trenched and watered artificially]. It was the greatest jewel <hi>or</hi> treasure. It was so shared between them that each man had it summer about; but the brook fell down below Leot&apos;s homestead, which ran over the meadow in the spring. There were dams in it, and it was cared for. It went ever so, that when Thorbeorn had to have the meadow he could not get at the brook, and so it went that Leot got to letting the words fall that Thorbeorn had no right to the meadow, and should not dare to claim it, etc.&mdash;Ch. 14, <hi>History of Howard the Icefrith-man</hi>.</note>.

<pb id=pb109a n=109><p n=24.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hall-ward Sougher</hi> was in battle against king Harold at Hafrs-frith. He came from Shielings in Hæreda-land to Iceland, and took in settlement Sougher-frith and Hall-wick as far as Stig [Sty], and dwelt there.

<p n=24.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ean-wend</hi>, Wicking&apos;s son, the brother of Thord of Al-weather, took in settlement all Ean-wend&apos;s-frith, and dwelt at Eyre.

<p n=24.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thurid</hi> <hi>or</hi> Thor-rid Sound-filler, and <hi rend=sc>Sibyl-stan</hi>, her son, came from Haleygo-land to Iceland, and took in settlement Waterlogs-wick, and dwelt at Water-ness. She was called Sound-filler, because she wrought by spells in a famine in Haleygo-land, that every sound should be full of herring. She also established the Fold-bank in Ice-frith-deep, and took for so doing an humble ewe from every franklin in Ice-frith. The sons of Sibyl-Stan were Ag-mund and Egil.

<p n=24.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Helge</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Hrod-wolf of Peak-fell. He was of Upland kin, on his mother&apos;s side, and there he grew up. He came to Iceland by the wish of his kinsmen. He put into Ey-frith, but it was by that time all settled; and with that he wished to go back to Norway, but he was driven back to Sougher-frith. He stayed through the winter there with Hall-ward, and in the spring he went forth to seek him a place for a homestead. He discovered a frith, and hit upon <pb id=pb110a n=110>a harpoon lying on the tide-mark [between high and low water marks], and called the place Harpoon-frith, and there he afterwards settled. His son was Thor-stan the Luckless. He went abroad, and slew a henchman of earl Hacon, Grit-gard&apos;s son; but Ey-wind, the earl&apos;s counsellor, sent him to We-beorn, the Trust-of-the-Sogners, for shelter. He took him in, though We-dis, his sister, dissuaded him from doing so. For this cause We-beorn sold his lands and went to Iceland, because he was not strong enough to keep the man.

<p n=24.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf</hi>, Bræce&apos;s son, took in settlement part of Harpoon-frith and Hall-wick, and dwelt there.

<p n=24.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ean-wend Knee</hi> came from Agd to Iceland with Thu-rid Rum-gylt, his wife. They took in settlement Elfet&apos;s-frith and Cook-place-frith, and dwelt there. Their son was Thor-laf, who was spoken of before, and Wal-brand, the father of Hall-grim and of Gun-nere, and of Bearg-ey, whom Haward Halt had to wife. Their son was An-laf.


<p n=25.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>25.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar</hi> was the name of a nobleman in Sogn. He was called We-gar [Weoh-gar], for he was a great sacrificer. He had many children. We-beorn, the Sogners&apos; champion, was his eldest son, and [further] We-stan and We-thorm and We-mund and We-gest and Weth-erne, and We-dis his daughter. After the death of We-gar, <hi rend=sc>We-beorn</hi> was at odds with earl Hacon, as was spoken of before. The brothers and <pb id=pb111a n=111>their sister came to Iceland. They had a hard and long passage out. At harvest-tide they made Lathe-wick west of Horn.

<p>Then We-beorn made a great sacrifice, saying that earl Hacon was making a sacrifice that day to their destruction. But when he was at his sacrifice, his brothers egged him to go to sea; and they paid no heed to the sacrifice, and put to sea. That same day their ship was wrecked under great cliffs in a gale, and they hardly got up the cliff [and saved themselves]; and the first to get up was We-beorn. It is now called the Sogners-cliff. But through the winter, Atle of Fleet, the thrall of Gar-mund Hell-skin, took and kept them all at his house, and would take no pay for their guesting, saying that Gar-mund did not lack meat. But when Atle went to Gar-mund, Gar-mund asked him how he was so bold as to take and keep such men at his cost. Atle answered, &lsquo;Because it shall be known, as long as Iceland is inhabited, how great an estate that man must have kept up, when one of his thralls dared to do such a thing without asking his leave.&rsquo; Gar-mund answered, &lsquo;For this thing that thou hast done thou shalt receive thy freedom, and the homestead that thou wast reeve over.&rsquo; And Atle afterward became a man of substance.

<p n=25.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> In the spring We-beorn took in settlement land between Scate-frith and Horse-frith, as far as a man could walk in a day, and that piece over which is called Foal-fort.

<p>We-beorn was a great fighting man, and there is a great history of him. He gave his sister We-dis in wedlock to Grim-wolf of Unad&apos;s-dale. They fell into quarrel, and We-beorn slew him hard by Grim-wolf&apos;s-mere, wherefore We-beorn was slain at Theng-eyre-moot in Deer-frith, and three men beside.


<pb id=pb112a n=112><p n=26.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>26.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gund-stan</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Hall-dor</hi> were the names of the sons of that Gund-beorn after whom <hi rend=sc>Gund-beorn&apos;s-reef</hi> is called. Gund-beorn was the son of Wolf-crow. They took in settlement Scate-frith, and Bath-dale, and Wash-wick up to Slim-frith. Berse was the son of Hall-dor, <hi>and</hi> the father of Thor-mod, Coal-brow&apos;s poet. There in Bath-dale dwelt afterwards Thor-beorn, Theod-rec&apos;s son, who slew An-laf, the son of Haward the Halt and of Bearg-ey, Wal-brand&apos;s daughter, whereof is made the History of the Ice-frith-folk and the Slaughter of Thor-beorn.

<p n=26.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Snow-beorn</hi>, the son of Ey-wind the East-man, the brother of Helge the Lean, took land in settlement between Slim-frith and Lang-dale-water, and dwelt at Water-frith. His son was Holm-stan, the father of Snow-beorn-Galte [boar], who slew Hall-beorn, Ord&apos;s son, at Kid-rock, hard by Hall-beorn&apos;s-ward <hi>or</hi> Hall-beorn&apos;s-cairn. He had before slain Hall-gerd, his wife, the daughter of Ord o&apos; Tongue.

<p>[<hi>According to Hawk&apos;s directions now followeth.</hi>]

<p>The mother of Snow-beorn Boar was Ceol-ware, and they were first cousins [on the sister side] of Ord o&apos; Tongue. Snow-beorn was fostered at Thing-ness with Thor-ord; but sometimes he would be with Ord o&apos; Tongue or his mother.

<p n=26.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hall-beorn</hi>, the son of Ord of Kid-rock, the son of Hall-kel, the brother of Cetil-beorn the Old, took to wife Hall-gerd, Ord o&apos; Tongue&apos;s daughter. They stayed with Ord the first winter [after their marriage], and Snow-beorn Boar was there at the time.

<p n=26.3.1>There was little love between the husband and wife. Hall-beorn made ready to depart by the flitting-days in the spring. But while he was getting ready to go, Ord went from his house to bathe at Reek-holt, <pb id=pb113a n=113>where his sheep-house was, for he did not wish to be at home when Hall-beorn went away, for he suspected that Hall-gerd would not be willing to go away with him. Ord had ever been a peace-maker between them. When Hall-beorn had saddled the horses, he went into the parlour <hi>or</hi> bower, and there sat Hall-gerd on the daïs combing her hair. The hair fell all over her and down on the floor, for she had the best hair of any woman that have ever been in Iceland (save Hall-gerd Long-breeks). Hall-beorn bade her stand up and come. She sat still and held her peace. Then he took hold of her, but she would not stir; and this happened three times. Then Hall-beorn stood up in front of her, and said [this verse]:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The linen-veiled lady lets me stand as a beggar, etc.
</lg>

                <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79.]


<p n=26.3.2>He twisted her hair round his hand, and tried to drag her off the daïs, but she sat still, and never budged a whit the more. Then he drew his sword, and hewed off her head. Then he walked out and rode away. There were three men with him, and they had two pack-horses. There were few folk at home, and news was sent at once to Ord. Says Ord, &lsquo;Go tell Snow-beorn at Ceol-ware-stead, for I will not ride after them.&rsquo; Snow-beorn rode after them with twelve men; but when Hall-beorn&apos;s men saw men riding after them, they prayed Hall-beorn to ride off, but he would not. Snow-beorn and his men came up with them at the hillocks that are now called Hall-beorn&apos;s-cairns. Hall-beorn and his <pb id=pb114a n=114>men went up on the hillocks, and defended themselves therefrom. There fell four [three] men of Snow-beorn&apos;s, and both Hall-beorn&apos;s companions. Then Snow-beorn hewed the foot off Hall-beorn at the ankle; then he hobbled into the southernmost hillock, and there he slew two more men ere he fell. There are three cairns on the hill there, but five on the other. Upon which Snow-beorn went back.

<p>[<hi>Here something is missing. Snow-beorn was no doubt sought to be outlawed by the kinsmen of Hall-beorn, hence he determines to go abroad.</hi>]

<p n=26.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Snow-beorn had a ship in Grim&apos;s-river-oyce, and Hrod-wolf of Red-sand bought half of her. There were twelve men with each of them. With Snow-beorn were Thor-kell and Summer-lid, the sons of Thor-gar the Red, the son of Einar the Staf-holting. Snow-beorn took with him Thor-ord of Thing-ness, his foster-son, and his wife; and Hrod-wolf took Styr-beorn, who made this verse after his dream:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The bane I see of both of us
    <l>(It is dreary all) north-west in the main:
    <l>Frost and cold, horrors of all kinds:
    <l>I see Snow-beorn slain by treason.
</lg>

                <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 361, No. 20.]


<p n=26.4.1>They went forth to seek <hi rend=sc>Gund-beorn&apos;s-reef</hi>, and discovered the land. Snow-beorn would not explore the land in the night. Styr-beorn went ashore, and found a bag of money in a cairn, and hid it. Snow-beorn struck him senseless with an ax, and the bag fell down. They made a hall, and it was all covered with snow. Thor-kell, the son of Red, found water on a fork, which was pushed out at the hall-luffer; that was in Goe [c. Feb. 10&ndash;March 10]. Then they dug themselves out. <pb id=pb115a n=115>Snow-beorn repaired the ship; but Thor-ord and his wife were at the hall on his behalf; and Styr-beorn and his men on behalf of Hrod-wolf; and the others were out hunting and fishing. Styr-beorn slew Thor-ord; and Hrod-wolf and he together slew Snow-beorn. Red&apos;s sons and all the others swore oaths to them to save their own lives.

<p n=26.4.2>They made Heleygo-land, and thence came to Iceland, and put in at Waddle. Thor-kell Trefil guessed what had happened to the sons of Red. Hrod-wolf built a work <hi>or</hi> fort on Strand-heath. Thor-kell Trefil sent Swegenung to take the head of Hrod-wolf [to slay him]. He went first to Her-mund at Mire; then to Anlaf at the Drongs; then to Guest at Hayes. He sent him to his friend Hrod-wolf. Swegenung slew Hrod-wolf and Styr-beorn; then he went to Hayes.

<p n=26.4.3>Guest exchanged sword and ax with him, and lent him two horses, white and black-maned, and sent a man to ride over Waddle as far as Coll&apos;s-frith, to tell Thor-beorn the Strong to fetch back the horses. He slew Swegenung at Swegenung&apos;s-eyre, because Swegenung&apos;s sword broke off at the hilt. Trefil used to boast against Guest <corr sic=where-ever>wherever</corr> their wits were compared together, that he had out-witted Guest when he made him send a man for the head of his own friend.

<p n=26.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anlaf Even-Coll</hi> took land in settlement from Lang-dale-water to Sand-eyre-water, and dwelt at Unad&apos;s-dale. He had to wife Thor-rid [S: Thora], Gund-stan&apos;s daughter. Their son was Grim-wolf, who had We-dis to wife, the sister of We-beorn.

<p n=26.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf Fast-holder</hi> was the name of a nobleman in Sogn. <pb id=pb116a n=116>He was at odds with earl Hacon, Grit-gard&apos;s son, and came to Iceland [<hi>al.</hi> by the counsel of king Harold], and took land in settlement there from Sand-eyre-water to Giantess-step-water in Raven&apos;s-frith, and dwelt at Snow-fells. His son was Un-fey, the father of [<hi>al.</hi> who had to wife] Ot-katla.


<p n=27.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>27.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aur-lyg</hi> [was] the son of Bead-were Wig-stark&apos;s son [O&apos; S ...?]. He came to Iceland by reason of the oppression of king Harold Fairhair, and stayed the first winter with Gar-mund Hell-skin. But in the spring Gar-mund gave him a place for a homestead in Ethel-wick, and the lands that appertained thereto. Aur-lyg had to wife Sig-ny, daughter of Un-blate, sister of Hagene the White. Their son was Cetil Gufa [Cathal Gobha], who had to wife Yra, Gar-mund&apos;s daughter. Aur-lyg owned Sletta and Iockle-friths.

<p n=27.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And now beginneth the tale of that Settlement of Gar-mund [which was turned into commons], as was written before, as far as Stream-ness from the east of Horn.


<p n=28.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>28.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Slate-beorn</hi>, the son of Her-fin and Halla, was a great wicking. He was ever a foe of king Harold. He came to Iceland, and put into Beorn&apos;s-frith with his ship, all set with shields; and ever after he was called Beorn o&apos; the Shields. He took land in settlement from Stream-ness to Drong. He dwelt at Shield-Beorn-wick, and had another homestead in Beorn&apos;s-ness, where are to be seen the great foundation-marks of his hall. His son was Thor-beorn, the father of Arn-gerd, whom Theod-rec, Sleight-Beorn&apos;s son, had to wife. Their sons were Thor-beorn, and Sturla, and Theod-rec.

<pb id=pb117a n=117><p n=28.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-wolf</hi> was the name of a man that wrecked his ship on Gar-wolf&apos;s-peak, and afterwards dwelt beneath this peak by the rede <hi>or</hi> counsel of Beorn.

<p n=28.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wald</hi>, the son of Os-wald [blank], the son of Wolf, the son of Oxen-Thoro, took in settlement Drong-land and Drong-wick up to Eng-ness [Meadow-ness or Hanger-ness], and dwelt at Drongs all his life. His son was Eiric the Red, who settled Greenland, as is said before.

<p n=28.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Here-rod Hwic-timber</hi> [<hi>al.</hi> White-sky] was a man of birth. He was slain by the contrivance of king Harold; and his three sons came to Iceland, and took land in settlement in the Strands&mdash;Ey-wind Ey-wind&apos;s-frith, Un-fey Un-fey&apos;s-frith, and Ing-wolf Ing-wolf&apos;s-frith, and there they dwelt afterwards.

<p n=28.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eiric-snare</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement from Ing-wolf&apos;s-frith to Fish-lease and Bag o&apos; Wood. He had to wife O-lof, the daughter of Ing-wolf of Ing-wolf&apos;s-frith. Their son was Flose, that dwelt at Wick, where the Eastmen wrecked their ship, and built another ship out of the wreck, which was called Tree-bag or Bag o&apos; Wood, on board of which Flose set out to go abroad, but was driven back into Ax-frith, whereby arose the <hi rend=sc>History of Bead-mod Gerpe and Grim-wolf</hi>.


<p n=29.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>29.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ean-wend Tree-foot</hi>, the son of Un-fey Barb-foot, the son of Ing-were Beitel [Mare&apos;s tail, <hi>Equisetum</hi>]. Ean-wend was against king Harold at Hafr&apos;s-frith, and lost his foot there. After that he came to Iceland, and took in settlement land from Cliff to Un-fare, Cold-back-wick, Colban&apos;s-wick, Burge&apos;s-wick, and dwelt at Cold-back till his old age. He was the <pb id=pb118a n=118>brother of God-borg, the mother of God-brand Cula, the father of Asta, the mother of king Anlaf the Saint. Ean-wend had four sons: one was Grette; another Thor-gar Flask-back; a third Asgar Eider-duck, the father of Calf and of Raven, whom Ceartan had to wife, and of Thor-rid, whom Thor-kel Cug had to wife [first], but afterwards Stan-thor, the son of Anlaf Peacock, had her to wife; and the fourth son of Ean-wend was Thor-grim Hoar-pate, the father of Os-mund, the father of Grette the Strong.

<p n=29.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Beorn-frith. He had to wife Leva. Their son was Swan of Swan&apos;s-hill, and dwelt there afterwards, and was drowned in the frith, and was seen to go into the fell, i.e. Swan&apos;s-hill.

<p n=29.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Stan-grim Troll</hi> took in settlement Stan-grim&apos;s-frith, and dwelt at Troll-tongue. His son was Thore, the father of Hall-dor, the father of Thor-wald Or-gode, the father of Ord of Bitter, the father of Stan-thor, the father of Ord, the father of High-Snorre, the father of Ord the monk, and of Thor-lac [S: Thor-hrolf] and Thor-arin Rosti [Tosti].

<p n=29.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Coll</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Coll&apos;s-frith and Scridin&apos;s-brow, and dwelt under the Fell as long as he lived.

<p n=29.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Bitter</hi> was the name of a man that was a great wicking, and a wicked man. He came to Iceland with his household, and took in settlement the frith that is now called Bitter, and dwelt there. Somewhat later Gud-laug, the brother of Gils Galley-neb, wrecked his ship there on the west over against the headland that is now called Gud-laug&apos;s-head. Gud-laug got ashore with his wife and <pb id=pb119a n=119>daughter, but all the other folk aboard were lost. There Thor-beorn Bitter found them, and he murdered them both, and took the child and brought her up. But when Gils Galley-neb was aware of this, he went forth thither and avenged his brother, and slew Thor-beorn Bitter and other men beside. Gud-laug&apos;s-wick is called after Gud-laug.


<p n=30.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>30.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Balce</hi> is the name of a man, the son of Clong, the son of Sote of Sote&apos;s-ness. He was against king Harold at Hafr&apos;s-frith, and after that he came to Iceland, and took in settlement all Ram-frith, and dwelt at both Balce-steads, and afterwards at By, and there he died. His son was Bearse God-leas [Temple-tenant?], who first dwelt at Berse-stead in Ram-frith, but afterwards he took in settlement Lang-mere-dale (as above is written); and they had another homestead before he took to wife Thor-dis, the daughter of Thor-hard of Hot-dale, and got Holm&apos;s-land as her portion. Their son was Arn-gar, the father of Beorn the Hot-dale champion. Gar-borg was the daughter of Balce, the mother of We-laf the Old.

<p n=30.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arn-dis the Wealthy</hi>, daughter of Stan-wolf the Low, afterwards took land in settlement in Ram-frith out from Bord-eyre. She dwelt at By. Her son was Thord, that dwelt before at Mull in Sower-by.

<p n=30.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Greniad</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Throst</hi>, the sons of Her-mund Holcin, took land in settlement in Ram-frith inward from Bord-eyre, and dwelt at Mells. From Greniad was come Horse-Gelle the priest, but from Throst came Orm. The son of Throst was Thor-kell of Cears-eyre, the father of <pb id=pb120a n=120>God-run, whom Thor-beorn Thynna [ax], the son of Hrod-mund the Halt, had to wife. They dwelt at Fair-brink. Thor-laf Hrod-mund&apos;s foster-son was their son.

<p>Heah-stan was the name of another son of Hrod-mund. They were all of one mind. Thore was the name of a son of Thor-kell, Throst&apos;s son. He dwelt at Mells. Helga was the name of his daughter.

<p n=30.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> At that time Sleight Helge came out to Bord-eyre, and Eor-wend his brother. They were wickings. They all went to Mells; they were twelve together without their servants. At that time Helge took to wife Helga, Thore&apos;s daughter. Hrod-mund and his fellows lost a stud of horses, and charged Helge and his fellows with it, and Mid-frith Sceg summoned them to the All-Moot for theft; but Hrod-mund was to watch over the district, and make a strong work <hi>or</hi> fort at Brink. The Eastmen got ready their ship.

<p n=30.4.1>One morning it came to pass that a raven came on the luffer at Brink and croaked shrilly. Then quoth Hrod-mund:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Outside I hear the raven in the morning:
    <l>So in times of yore when kings were doomed they screamed.
</lg>

                <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 56, 57.]


<p n=30.4.3>Thor-beorn quoth&mdash;[repetition of same sentences in different words].

<p n=30.4.5>At that very time the Eastmen got into the work; for the workmen had not shut the work after them. The brothers went forth [to fight]. The women said that Hrod-mund was too old, and Thor-laf too young to go forth [to fight]. Thor-laf was then 19 [15] winters old. He and Hrod-mund ran out with their weapons, and Hrod-mund quoth:&mdash;


<pb id=pb121a n=121><lg>
    <l>My death day was not marked out for me to-day or yesterday.
    <l>I care not though swords play on red shields.&mdash;[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 57.]
</lg>


<p n=30.4.7>Six Eastmen fell in the work, and the other six got away; but as Thor-beorn was about to shut the work after them, Eor-wend hurled a dart [atgar] through him. Thor-beorn took the dart out of the wound and thrust it between Eor-wend&apos;s shoulders, so that it came out at his breast, and they both fell dead to the earth. Helge caught up Eor-wend, and cast him on his back, and so ran on. Heah-stan ran after them till Helge cast him off his back, and then he turned back. Hrod-mund had fallen, but Thor-laf was wounded to the death. The women asked what had happened. Ha-stan quoth:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>There are six wicking dead on the causeway.
</lg>


<p n=30.4.9>The women asked how many there were. Heah-stan quoth:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>There were four of us kinsmen against twelve sea-rovers.
</lg>


<p n=30.4.11>The women asked how many had fallen of the wickings, and Heah-stan quoth:&mdash;


<lg rend="font-size(small)">
    <l>Seven of them have struck the earth with their noses:
    <l>The greater half of them shall never launch their ship hence:
    <l>We gave the peace-breakers little peace....
    <l>There was a grim clatter of stone-casting, ere the sea-men turned on their heels:
    <l>The carrion bird had his prey, when Sleight Helge got a red hood:
    <l>They brought up from the ship white helmets, but they took away bloody pates.
</lg>


<p n=30.4.13>Helge and his mates put to sea the same day, and were all lost aboard Helge&apos;s ship off Scridin&apos;s-brow. Thor-laf was healed, and dwelt at <pb id=pb122a n=122>Brink, but Heah-stan went abroad and fell on the Long Serpent with king Anlaf Tryggwason.

<p n=30.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Now are written down the most of the Settlement in the West-frith-folks&apos; Quarter, according to what men of knowledge have told. It may now be heard that this Quarter hath been largely settled by men of rank, from whence are come many gentle families, as might now have been heard.

</div3>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 lang=is id=lib3 n=III rend="align-with(en.lib3)">
<head>LIB. III.</head>


<p n=0.1><anchor id=a122.7>Nú hefr upp Land-n&aoacute;m í Norðlendinga fiórðunge<note place=apparatus id=an122.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fiórðunge]</ab> es fiol-bygðastr hefir veret af &aolig;llo Íslande, ok st&oeacute;rstar S&aolig;gor hafa g&oelig;rzk bæðe at forno ok nýjo, sem enn mon ritið verða, ok raun berr á, <foreign lang=en-UK>add. S: i.e. which hath been the thickest settled of all parts of Iceland, and in which the greatest histories have taken place, both old and new, which shall be written below and proof given thereof.</foreign></note>.

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a122.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Eysteinn Mein-fretr, son Alfs or Osto, nam <anchor id=a122.9>Hrúta-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd ena Eystre næst efter Balca, ok <anchor id=a122.10>bió þar n&oelig;kkora vetr, áðr hann fór í Dala at bua, ok feck Þórhildar,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a122.11>dóttor Þórsteins Rauðs<note place=apparatus id=an122.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Rauðs]</ab> rauz, Cd.</note>: þeirra syner vóro þeir Alfr í D&aolig;lom, Þórðr, <anchor id=a122.12>ok Þórolfr, ok Hrappr.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a122.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þóroddr hét maðr, es nam Hrúta-fi&aolig;rð<note place=apparatus id=an122.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> land í Hrúta-firðe, S.</note>, ok bió á Þóroddz-st&aolig;ðom: <anchor id=a122.14>hans son vas Arnórr Hýnefr, es átte Gerðe, dóttor <anchor id=a122.15>B&aolig;ðvars or B&aolig;ðvars-hólom. Þeirra syner vóro þeir, Þórbi&aolig;rn, es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a122.16>Gretter vá, ok Þóroddr Dr&aoacute;po-stúfr, es orte Ofeigs-vísor<note place=apparatus id=an122.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es orte O.-visor]</ab> add. M&ast;.</note>, faðer <anchor id=a122.17>Valgerðar es átte Skegge, Gamla son, Þórðar sonar, Eyjolfs sonar, <anchor id=a123.1><pb id=pb123 n=123><note place=margin>[169: iii. 1.]</note>Eyjars sonar, Þórhrolfs sonar Fasthallda frá Snæfi&aolig;llom <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>son <anchor id=a123.2>Skeggja Skammhondungs var Gamle, f. Alfdísar, m. Oddz <anchor id=a123.3>Munks<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an123.1><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gamla son ... Munks]</ab> add. S; er átte Skegge H&oelig;lge Skammhondungr, Cd. (sic).</note>.


<p n=2.1><anchor id=a123.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Skautaðar-skegge<note place=apparatus id=an123.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Skutaðar, S.</note> hét maðr ágætr í Norege. <anchor id=a123.5>Hans son vas Bi&aolig;rn, es kallaðr vas Skinna-Bi&aolig;rn;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a123.6>hann vas Holmgarðz-fare. Hann fór til Íslannz, ok nam Mið&shy;fi&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a123.7>ok Línacra-dal. Hans son vas Miðfiarðar-Skegge; hann <anchor id=a123.8>vas<note place=apparatus id=an123.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Miðf.-Sk.; hann vas]</ab> om. H.</note> garpr mikill ok farmaðr<note place=apparatus id=an123.4><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok farmaðr]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a123.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann herjaðe í Austr-veg, ok lá í Danm&aolig;rk við Sióland: <anchor id=a123.10>hann vas hlutaðr til at brióta haug Hrólfs konungs Kraka; ok tók<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a123.11>hann þar or Skofnung sverð Hrólfs, ok &oelig;xe Hiallta, ok miket fé <anchor id=a123.12>annat. En hann náðe eige Laufa; þvi at B&aolig;ðvarr vilde at hónom; <anchor id=a123.13>en Hrólfr konungr varðe hann<note place=apparatus id=an123.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>varðe hann]</ab> emend.; vardiz, Cd.</note>.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a123.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hann fór til Íslannz síðan, ok bió at Reykjom í Miðfirðe, <anchor id=a123.15>ok átte Hallbero Gríms dóttor. Syner Skeggja vóro þeir Eiðr,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a123.16>es átte Hafþóro, dóttor Þórbergs Corna-múla, ok Álofar Elliða-skialldar, <anchor id=a123.17>systor Þórgeirs Gollnis. Þau &aoacute;tto m&aolig;rg b&aolig;rn. Annarr <anchor id=a123.18>son Skeggja vas Collr, faðer Halldórs, f&aolig;ðor þeirra Þórdísar, es <anchor id=a123.19>Skálld-Helge átte, ok Þórkotlo. D&oeacute;ttr Skeggja vóro þær Hróðný, <anchor id=a123.20>es átte Þórðr Geller; ok Þórbi&aolig;rg, es átte Ásbi&aolig;rn enn Auðge,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a123.21>Harðar son: dótter<note place=apparatus id=an123.6><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es átte ... dóttor]</ab> <foreign lang=en-UK>add. S, leaving the name blank, which is here supplied by S&ast;</foreign> (Barð. Saga); þeir Eiðr ok Collr, H.</note> þeirra vas Ingibi&aolig;rg, es átte Illoge enn Svarte <anchor id=a124.1><pb id=pb124 n=124><note place=margin>[170: iii. I.]</note>á Gils-backa: þeirra syner Gunnlaugr Orms-tunga, Hermundr, ok <anchor id=a124.2>Ketill<note place=apparatus id=an124.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeirra syner ... Ketill]</ab> add. S.</note>.


<p n=3.1><anchor id=a124.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Haralldr Hringr hét maðr ætt-stórr.  Hann <anchor id=a124.4>kom skipe síno í Vestr-hóp, ok sat enn fyrsta vetr <anchor id=a124.5>þar nær sem hann hafðe lent, ok nú heita Hring-staðer<note place=apparatus id=an124.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þar nær ... Hring-staðer]</ab> S; þar sem heita Hr., H.</note>. Hann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a124.6>nam Vatz-nes allt útan<note place=apparatus id=an124.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>útan]</ab> om. Cd. vestan] austan, S.</note> til Ambáttar-ár fyr vestan, allt inn til <anchor id=a124.7>Þver-ár, ok þar yfir af þvero til Braga-óss, ok allt þeim-megin<note place=apparatus id=an124.4><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> þannvegar, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a124.8>Biarga út til sióvar, ok bió at Hólom. Hans son vas Þórbrandr, <anchor id=a124.9>faðer Ásbrannz, f&aolig;ðor Solva ens Prúða<note place=apparatus id=an124.5><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Prúða]</ab> thus<corr sic=",">.</corr></note> á Ægis-síðo, ok Þórgeirs <anchor id=a124.10>es bió at Hólom; hans dótter vas Ástríðr, es átte Arnmóðr Héðins<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a124.11>son. Héðinn vas son þeirra. Onnor dótter Þórgeirs vas Þórgerðr, <anchor id=a124.12>es átte Þórgrímr, son Pet<hi>a</hi>rs frá Óse<note place=apparatus id=an124.6><ab type=textRef>ok Þórgeirs ... Óse]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a124.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Sóte hét maðr es nam Vestr-hóp, ok bió under Sóta-felle.


<p n=4.1><anchor id=a124.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> hét iarl á Englande; hann átte <anchor id=a124.15>Álofo, dóttor Ragnars Loðbrókar: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a124.16>þau, Bi&aolig;rn, faðer Auðunnar Sk&aolig;kols; ok Eiríkr, faðer Sigurðar <anchor id=a124.17>Bióða-Skalla; ok Ísgerðr, es átte Þórer iarl á Verma-lande.

<p n=4.1.1><anchor id=a124.18>Auðunn Sk&aolig;koll fór til Íslannz, ok nam Víðe-dal, ok bió á <anchor id=a124.19>Auðunnar-st&aolig;ðom. Með hónom kom út Þórgils Giallande, félage <anchor id=a124.20>hans, faðer Þórarens Goða. Auðunn Sk&aolig;kull vas faðer Þóro<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <pb id=pb125 n=125><note place=margin>[173: iii. 2.]</note>Mos-hals, móðor Ulfilldar, es átte Goðbrandr Kúla; þeirra dótter<note place=apparatus id=an125.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Goðbr. K. þ. d.]</ab> left blank in Cd.</note> <anchor id=a125.1>Ásta, móðer Óláfs konungs ens Helga....<note place=apparatus id=an125.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Helga]</ab> two lines left blank in Cd.</note> Son Auðunnar Sk&aolig;kols <anchor id=a125.2>vas Ásgeirr at Ásgeirs-&aoacute;; hann átte Iórunne, dóttor Ingimundar <anchor id=a125.3>ens Gamla. Þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau, Þórvalldr, faðer Dollu, móðor <anchor id=a125.5>Gizorar byscops: ok Auðunn, faðer Ásgeirs, f&aolig;ðor Auðunnar,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a125.6>f&aolig;ðor Egils, es átte Ulfeiðe, dóttor Eyjolfs Goðmundar sonar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>ok <anchor id=a125.7>var þeirra son Eyjolfr, es vegenn var á Alþinge, f. Orms capalíns <anchor id=a125.8>Þorláks byscops ens Helga<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. Annarr son Auðunnar Sk&aolig;kols vas <anchor id=a125.9>Eysteinn, faðer Þórsteins, f&aolig;ðor Helga, f&aolig;ðor Þórorms <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Oddz, <anchor id=a125.10>f. Hallbiarnar, f. Sigvatz prestz<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. Dótter Ásgeirs at Ásgeirs-&aoacute; vas<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a125.11>Þórbi&aolig;rg B&oeacute;jar-bót<note place=apparatus id=an125.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Beiar-, Cd.</note>.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a125.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ormr hét maðr, es nam Orms-dal, ok bió þar. Hann vas <anchor id=a125.13>faðer Oddz, f&aolig;ðor Þórvallz<note place=apparatus id=an125.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórvallz]</ab> Þóroddz, S.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Helga, f&aolig;ðor Harra, f&aolig;ðor Ióro, <anchor id=a125.14>móðor Þórdísar, móðor Tans<note place=apparatus id=an125.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Tanna, S.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Skafta.


<p n=5.1><anchor id=a125.15><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Ketill Raumr hét herser ágætr í Raums-dale í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a125.16>Norege: hann vas son Orms Skelja-mola, Hross-biarnar <anchor id=a125.17>sonar, Raums sonar, Iotun-biarnar sonar norðan or Norege<note place=apparatus id=an125.6><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann vas son ... norðan or Norege]</ab> add. S.</note>. <anchor id=a125.18>Ketill átte Miollo, dóttor Ánar Bogsveigiss. Þórsteinn hét son <anchor id=a125.19>þeirra. Hann vá á skógenom til Upplanda, af á-eggjon f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a125.20>síns, I&aolig;kul, son Ingimundar iarls af Gautlande ok Vígdísar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a126.1><pb id=pb126 n=126><note place=margin>[173: iii. 2.]</note>I&aolig;kull gaf hónom líf; síðan feck Þórsteinn<note place=apparatus id=an126.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórsteinn]</ab> S; om. Cd.</note> Þórdísar systor <anchor id=a126.2>hans.

<p n=5.1.1><anchor id=a126.3>Þeirra son vas Ingimundr enn Gamle. Hann vas f&oeacute;ddr í Hefni <anchor id=a126.4>með Þóre, f&aolig;ðor Gríms ok Hrómundar: Heiðr volva spáðe þeim <anchor id=a126.5>&aolig;llom at byggja á því lande es þá vas úfundet vestr í haf; en<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a126.6>Ingimundr kvezk við því skyldo g&oelig;ra. Volvan kvað hann þat <anchor id=a126.7>eige mondo mega; ok sagðe þat til iartegna, at hlutr m&oelig;ndi hverfa <anchor id=a126.8>or pússe hans<note place=apparatus id=an126.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> at þá munde horfenn hlutr or p. hans, S. finnaz, S.</note>, ok kvað hann þá mundo finna es hann gr&oeacute;fe fyrer <anchor id=a126.9>&aolig;ndoges-súlom sínom á landeno<note place=apparatus id=an126.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á landeno]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a126.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ingimundr vas víkingr mikill, ok herjaðe í Vestr-víking<note place=apparatus id=an126.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Vestr-víking]</ab> íafnan, add. S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a126.11>Sæmundr hét félage hans Suðreyskr. Þeir kvómo or hernaðe í <anchor id=a126.12>þann tíma es Haralldr konungr geck til lannz, ok<note place=apparatus id=an126.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>geck til lannz ok]</ab> add. S.</note> lagðe til orrosto <anchor id=a126.13>í Hafrs-firðe við þá Þóre Haklang. Ingimundr vilde veita konunge, <anchor id=a126.14>en Sæmundr eige; ok skilðe þar félag þeirra. Efter orrostona <anchor id=a126.15>gifte Haralldr konungr Ingimunde Vígdíse, dóttor Þóriss iarls<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a126.16>Þegjanda. Þau Iorundr Hals vóro friðlo-b&aolig;rn hans. Ingimundr <anchor id=a126.17>unðe hverge; því fýste Haraldr konungr hann, at leita forlaga <anchor id=a126.18>sínna til Íslannz: en Ingimundr lézk þat eige ætlað hafa. En þó <anchor id=a126.19>sende hann tvá Finna í ham-f&aolig;rom til Íslannz efter hlut sínom&mdash;Þat <anchor id=a126.20>vas Freyr g&oelig;rr af silfre&mdash;Finnarner kómo aftr, ok h&aolig;fðo fundet<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a126.21>hlutenn, ok n&aoacute;ðo eige. Vísoðo þeir Ingimunde<note place=apparatus id=an126.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ingimunde]</ab> add. S.</note> til í dale einom <anchor id=a127.1><pb id=pb127 n=127><note place=margin>[175: iii. 3.]</note>miðle holta þriggja<note place=apparatus id=an127.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þriggja]</ab> tveggja, S.</note>, ok s&aolig;gðo hónom allt Iannz-leg hvé háttað vas <anchor id=a127.2>þar es þeir skyldo byggja.

<p n=5.2.1><anchor id=a127.3>Efter þat fór Ingimundr til Íslannz, ok með hónom Iorundr <anchor id=a127.4>Hals, mágr hans, ok Eyvindr S&oelig;rkver, ok Ásmundr ok Hvate <anchor id=a127.5>viner hans<note place=apparatus id=an127.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Hvate viner hans]</ab> S; hinn Hvate vinr hans, Cd.</note>: ok þrælar hans, Friðmundr ok B&aolig;ðvarr ok Þórer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a127.6>Refskegg, ok Ulfkell. Þeir tóko Grímsár-ós fyr sunnan land<note place=apparatus id=an127.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fyr s. land]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok <anchor id=a127.7>vóro aller um vet<hi>t</hi>renn á Hvann-eyre með Gríme fóst-bróðor Ingimundar. <anchor id=a127.8>En um váret fóro þeir norðr um heiðar. Þeir kómo <anchor id=a127.9>í fi&aolig;rð þann es þeir fundo hrúta tvá&mdash;þeir k&aolig;lloðo þar Hrúta-fi&aolig;rð&mdash;síðan <anchor id=a127.10>fóro þeir norðr um hérað, ok g&aoacute;fo víða &oelig;r-nefne.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a127.11>Hann vas um vetr í Víðe-dale í Ingimundar-holte. Þaðan s&aoacute; þeir <anchor id=a127.12>fi&aolig;ll snælaus<note place=apparatus id=an127.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> S; sniólaus, Cd. </note> í land-suðr, ok fóro þangat<note place=apparatus id=an127.5><ab type=textRef>þangat]</ab> þannveg, S.</note> um váret. Þar kende <anchor id=a127.13>Ingimundr l&aolig;nd þau es hónom vas til vísat. Þórdís, dótter hans <anchor id=a127.14>vas alen í Þórdísar-holte.

<p n=5.3><anchor id=a127.15><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ingimundr nam Vatz-dal allan upp frá Helga-vatne ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a127.16>Urðar-vatne fyr austan. Hann bió at Hofe; ok fann hlut sínn <anchor id=a127.17>es hann gróf fyr &aolig;ndogis-súlom sínom. Þórsteinn vas son þeirra <anchor id=a127.18>Vígdísar; ok I&aolig;kull; ok Þórer Hafrs-þió; ok H&aolig;gne: Smiðr <anchor id=a127.19>hét ambáttar son ok Ingimundar. En d&oeacute;ttr hans Iórunn, ok <anchor id=a127.20>Þórdís.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=5.4><anchor id=a127.21><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Iorundr Hals nam út frá Urðar-vatne, ok til Mógils-l&oelig;kjar, <anchor id=a127.22>ok bió á Grund under Iorundar-felle. Hans son vas Márr á Márs-st&aolig;ðom.

<pb id=pb128 n=128><note place=margin>[176: iii. 3.]</note>

<p n=5.5><anchor id=a128.1><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an128.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> This § from S.</note>Hvate nam út frá Mógils-l&oeacute;k til Gilj-ár, ok bió á Hvata-st&aolig;ðom.

<p n=5.6><anchor id=a128.2><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Ásmundr nam út frá Helga-vatne of<note place=apparatus id=an128.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>of]</ab> ok, Cd.; um, S.</note> Þingeyra-sveit, ok bió <anchor id=a128.3>under Gnúpe.

<p n=5.7><anchor id=a128.5><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Friðmundr nam Fors&oeacute;lo-dal.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=5.8><anchor id=a128.6><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Eyvindr S&oelig;rkver nam Bl&aolig;ndo-dal. Hans son vas Hermundr, <anchor id=a128.7>ok Hrómundr enn Halte.

<p n=5.9><anchor id=a128.8><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Ingimundr fann á vatne eino bero, ok tvá húna hvíta<note place=apparatus id=an128.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hvíta]</ab> add. S.</note> með <anchor id=a128.9>henne;&mdash;þat kallaðe hann Húna-vatn. Efter þat fór Ingimundr <anchor id=a128.10>útan, ok gaf Haralde konunge dýren.&mdash;Ecke h&aolig;fðo menn fyrr séð<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a128.11>í Nórege hvíta-bi&aolig;rno&mdash;þá gaf Haraldr konungr Ingimunde skipet <anchor id=a128.12>Stíganda með viðar-farme, ok siglðe (hann) tveim skipom til <anchor id=a128.13>Íslannz; ok siglðe fyr norðan land<note place=apparatus id=an128.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>land]</ab> add. S.</note> vestr um Skaga fyrstr manna, <anchor id=a128.14>ok hélt upp í Húna-vatn&mdash;þar heiter nú Stíganda-hróf hiá <anchor id=a128.15>Þingeyrom.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a128.16>Efter þat vas Hrafn Austmaðr með Ingimunde, ok hafðe sverð <anchor id=a128.17>gótt; ok bar þat í hof. Því tók Ingimundr þat af hónom.

<p n=5.10><anchor id=a128.18><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Hallormr ok Þórormr br&oeacute;ðr kómo út ok<note place=apparatus id=an128.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>kómo út ok]</ab> add. S.</note> váro með Ingimunde. <anchor id=a128.19>Þá feck Hallormr Þórdísar dóttor hans, ok fylgðe henne <anchor id=a128.20>heiman Cárns-ár-land. Þeirra son vas Þórgrímr Cárnsár-goðe.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a128.21>Þórormr bió í Þórorms-tungo.

<p n=5.11><anchor id=a128.22><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Ingimunde hurfo svín tio, ok fundosk annat hausteð í Svína-dale<note place=apparatus id=an128.6><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>í Svína- dale]</ab> add. S.</note> <anchor id=a129.1><pb id=pb129 n=129><note place=margin>[177: iii. 4.]</note>ok vóro þá saman hundrað svína. G&aolig;ltr hét Beigaðr; hann <anchor id=a129.2>hlióp á Svína-vatn, ok svamm þar til at af gengo klaufernar: hann <anchor id=a129.3>sprack á Beigaðar-hvále.

<p n=5.12><anchor id=a129.4><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Hrolleifr enn Mikle, ok Liót móðer hans, kómo út í Borgar-firðe. <anchor id=a129.5>Þau fóro norðr um sveiter, ok fengo &oelig;ngan ráð-stafa áðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a129.6>þau kómo í Skaga-fi&aolig;rð til Sæmundar. Hrolleifr vas sonr Arnallz, <anchor id=a129.7>bróðor Sæmundar; því vísaðe hann þeim norðr á H&aolig;fða-str&aolig;nd <anchor id=a129.8>til Þórðar; en hann feck hónom (land) í Hrolleifs-dale, ok bió <anchor id=a129.9>hann þar. Hrolleifr fiflðe Hróðnýjo, dóttor Una í Unaðs-dale<note place=apparatus id=an129.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Una-dal, S, less right, the full name being Unadh-.</note>. <anchor id=a129.10>Oddr Una son sat fyrer hónom, ok vá Liót systrung hans, en<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a129.11>særðe hann á f&oeacute;te, þvi at kyrtil hans bito eige i&aolig;rn. Hrolleifr vá <anchor id=a129.12>Odd, ok tvá menn aðra; en tveir kómosk undan. Fyrer þat <anchor id=a129.13>g&oelig;rðe H&aolig;fða-Þórðr þau héraðs-sek, svá vítt sem v&aolig;tn féllo<note place=apparatus id=an129.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> sem vatn-föll deildo, S.</note> til <anchor id=a129.14>Skaga-fiarðar. Þá sende Sæmundr Hrolleif tíl Ingimundar ens <anchor id=a129.15>Gamla. Hann sette hann niðr í Oddz-ás gegnt Hofe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=5.12.1><anchor id=a129.16>Hann átte veiðe í Vatzdals-&aoacute; við Ingimund, ok skylde ganga or <anchor id=a129.17>&aoacute; fyrer Hofs-m&aolig;nnom; en hann vilde eige or ganga fyrer<note place=apparatus id=an129.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ganga fyrer]</ab> Hofs&mmmacr;., add. Cd.</note> sonom <anchor id=a129.18>Ingimundar; ok b&aolig;rðosk þeir um &aoacute;na. Þá vas sagt Ingimunde; <anchor id=a129.19>ok vas hann þá blindr; ok lét hann smala-svein leiða hest under <anchor id=a129.20>ser á &aoacute;na miðle þeirra. Hrolleifr skaut spióte í gegnom hann.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a129.21>Þeir fóro þá heim. Ingimundr sende sveinenn at segja Hrolleife: <anchor id=a130.1><pb id=pb130 n=130><note place=margin>[179: iii. 4.]</note>en hann vas dauðr í &aolig;nduge þá es syner hans kómo heim. <anchor id=a130.2>Hrolleifr sagðe móðor sínne: hon kvað þá reyna mundo hvárt <anchor id=a130.3>meira mætte gifta Ingimundar sona, eða kunnosta hennar; ok bað <anchor id=a130.4>hann þá fyrst í braut fara. Þórsteinn skylde reyna efter Hrolleife, <anchor id=a130.5>ok hafa kost-grip af arfe. Eige settosk þeir í &aolig;ndoge<note place=apparatus id=an130.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&aolig;ndoge]</ab> hásæte, S.</note> f&aolig;ðor síns<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a130.6>Ingimundar-syner. (Þeir) fóro norðr til Geirmundar<note place=apparatus id=an130.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> S; Sæmundar, Cd.</note>, ok gaf Þórsteinn <anchor id=a130.7>hónom sex tige silfrs, at hann skyte Hrolleife braut. Ingimundar-syner <anchor id=a130.8>r&aolig;kðo spor hans norðan um halsa til Vatz-dals. <anchor id=a130.9>Þórsteinn sende húskarl í Ás á niósn. Hann kvað tolf vísor<note place=apparatus id=an130.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> S; kvað kveðnar, Cd. (badly).</note> áðr <anchor id=a130.10>til dura vas genget. Hann sá fata-hrúgo á br&aolig;ndom, ok kom<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a130.11>undan rautt klæðe. Þórsteinn kvað þar vereð hafa Hrolleif, &lsquo;ok <anchor id=a130.12>mun Liót hafa blóteð til lang-lífiss hónom.&rsquo; Þeir fóro í Ás, ok <anchor id=a130.13>vilde Þórsteinn sitja yfer durom; ok náðe því eige fyrer I&aolig;kle, þvi at <anchor id=a130.14>hann vill þar vesa. Maðr geck út ok sásk<note place=apparatus id=an130.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sásk]</ab> saðs, Cd.</note> um; þá leidde annarr <anchor id=a130.15>Hrolleif efter ser. I&aolig;kull brásk við, ok fellde ofan skíða-hlaða;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a130.16>en gat þó kastað kefle til br&oeacute;ðra sínna. Hann réð á Hrolleif, ok <anchor id=a130.17>ulto þeir báðer ofan fyr breckona, ok varð I&aolig;kull efre. Þá kom <anchor id=a130.18>Þórsteinn at, ok neytto þeir þá vápna. Þá vas Liót út komen <anchor id=a130.19>ok geck &aolig;fog; hon hafðe h&aolig;foðet miðle fóta ser; en klæðen á <anchor id=a130.20>bake ser. I&aolig;kull hió h&aolig;foð af Hrolleife, ok rak í and-lit Liótu.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a130.21>Þá kvazk hon of sein orðet hafa; &lsquo;Nú m&oelig;nde um snuask <anchor id=a130.22>i&aolig;rðen fyr siónom mínom, en ér mundot aller &oeacute;rzk hafa.&rsquo;

<pb id=pb131 n=131><note place=margin>[184: iii. 5.]</note>

<p n=5.13><anchor id=a131.1><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Efter þat kauss Þórsteinn Hofs-land; en I&aolig;kull hafðe <anchor id=a131.2>sverðet, ok bió í Tungo. Þórer hafðe goðorð, ok bió at Undorn-felle<note place=apparatus id=an131.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Emend. (MS. Biorn Olsen); Undun-felle, H, S.</note>, <anchor id=a131.3>ok geck berserks-gang. H&aolig;gne hafðe Stíganda, ok vas far-maðr. <anchor id=a131.4>Smiðr bió á Smiðs-st&aolig;ðom. Þórsteinn átte Þórríðe Gyðjo, <anchor id=a131.5>dóttor Solmundar í Ásbiarnar-nese: þeirra son vas Ingolfr enn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a131.6>Fagre, ok Goðbrandr.  I&aolig;kull vas son Bárðar I&aolig;kuls sonar, es <anchor id=a131.7>Óláfr konungr enn Helge lét drepa.&mdash;Þat sagðe I&aolig;kull stiga-maðr, <anchor id=a131.8>at lenge mundo glap-víg haldask í ætt þeirre.

<p n=5.14><anchor id=a131.9><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Eyvindr Auðkúla hét maðr; hann nam Svína-dal ok bió <anchor id=a131.10>á Auðkúlo-st&aolig;ðom.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=5.15><anchor id=a131.11><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Þórgils Giallande bió at Svína-vatne, es út kom með Auðunne <anchor id=a131.12>Skokul<note place=apparatus id=an131.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> Skokle, S.</note>. Hans syner vóro þeir Digr-Ormr, es v&aoacute;go Skarp-heðin <anchor id=a131.13>Véfr&oelig;ðar son í Vatz-skarðe.

<p n=5.16><anchor id=a131.14><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> Eyvindr S&oelig;rkver nam Bl&aolig;ndo-dal, sem fyrr es ritið<note place=apparatus id=an131.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sem ... ritið]</ab> add. S.</note>. Hans <anchor id=a131.15>son vas Hrómundr Hallte, es vá H&aolig;gna Ingimundar son, þá es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a131.16>þeir Márr ok Ingimundar syner b&aolig;rðosk um Deilðar-hialla: því <anchor id=a131.17>vas hann g&oelig;rr or Norðlendinga-fiórðunge. Hans syner vóro þeir <anchor id=a131.18>Þórbi&aolig;rn, ok Hásteinn, es b&aolig;rðosk við Sleito-Helga<note place=apparatus id=an131.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Slettu-, Cd.</note> í Hrúta-firðe. <anchor id=a131.19>Annarr son Eyvindar S&oelig;rkvess vas Hermundr, faðer Hildar, es <anchor id=a131.20>átte Ávallde Ingiallz son: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau Colfinna, es átte<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a132.1><pb id=pb132 n=132><note place=margin>[184: iii. 5.]</note>Gríss Sæmings son; ok Brandr es vá Gallta Óttars son &aoacute; Húna-vatz-þinge <anchor id=a132.2>fyrer níð Hallfr&oelig;ðar.

<p n=5.17><anchor id=a132.3><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> Þórbi&aolig;rn Colcan<note place=apparatus id=an132.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Kolkr, S (badly).</note> hét maðr. Hann nam Colco-mýrar, ok <anchor id=a132.4>bió þar meðan hann lifðe<note place=apparatus id=an132.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>meðan h. l.]</ab> add. S.</note>.


<p n=6.1><anchor id=a132.5><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> Ævarr<note place=apparatus id=an132.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Ævarr átte (blank) þeirra son vas Vefreyðr; syner Ævars laun-getner vóro þeir Karle, etc., S (better?).</note> hét maðr, son Ketils Hello-flaga, ok Þóríðar,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a132.6>dóttor Harallz konungs Goll-skeggs, or Sogne. Syner <anchor id=a132.7>Ævars vóro þeir Véfr&oelig;ðr ok Carle, ok Þórbi&aolig;rn Strúgr, ok Þórðr <anchor id=a132.8>Mikill Ævarr fór til Íslannz or víking ok syner hans, aðrer an <anchor id=a132.9>Véfr&oelig;ðr, hann vas efter í víking. Með hónom fór út Gunnsteinn <anchor id=a132.10>frænde hans, ok Auðolfr, ok Gautr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=6.1.1><anchor id=a132.11>Ævarr kom skipe síno í Bl&aolig;ndo-ós; þá vóro numen l&aolig;nd fyr <anchor id=a132.12>vestan Bl&aolig;ndo. Ævarr fór upp með Bl&aolig;ndo at leita ser land-náms, <anchor id=a132.13>ok kom þar sem heita Móbergs-breckor; sette hann (þar)<note place=apparatus id=an132.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en er hann kom ... sette hann, etc., S. þar]</ab> om. Cd.</note> niðr <anchor id=a132.14>st&aolig;ng háva, ok kvazk þar taka Véfr&oelig;ðe syne sínom bú-stað. Síðan <anchor id=a132.15>nam hann Langa-dal allan upp þaðan, ok svá þar fyr norðan hals.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a132.16>Þar skifte hann l&aolig;ndom með skipverjom sínom. Ævarr bió í <anchor id=a132.17>Ævars-skarðe.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a132.18><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Véfr&oelig;ðr kom út síðarr í G&aolig;ngo-skarz-ár-ós, ok geck norðan <anchor id=a132.19>til f&aolig;ðor síns; ok kende Ævarr hann eige. Þeir glímðo svá at <anchor id=a132.20>upp gengo stockar aller í húseno<note place=apparatus id=an132.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> S; húsunum, Cd.</note> áðr Véfr&oelig;ðr sagðe til sín. Hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a132.21>g&oelig;rðe bú at Móberge sem ætlað vas: en Þórbi&aolig;orn Strúgr á <anchor id=a133.1><pb id=pb133 n=133><note place=margin>[187: iii. 6.]</note>Strúgs-st&aolig;ðom: en Gunnsteinn á Gunnsteins-st&aolig;ðom: Carle á <anchor id=a133.2>Carla-st&aolig;ðom: Þórðr (Mikill) á Mikils-st&aolig;ðom: Auðolfr á Auðolfs-st&aolig;ðom.

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a133.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Gautr bygðe í Gautz-dale; hann vas einhendr. Þeir Eyvindr <anchor id=a133.5>S&oelig;rkver fóro ser sialfer, ok vildo eíge lifa efter Ingimund enn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a133.6>Gamla: Haukr bió þar sem Hauks-staðer<note place=apparatus id=an133.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Hauks-grafer, S.</note> heita. Véfr&oelig;ðr átte <anchor id=a133.7>Gunnhillde, dóttor Eireks or Goðd&aolig;lom, systor Holmg&aolig;ngo-Starra: <anchor id=a133.8>þeirra syner vóro þeir Ulfheðinn, es þeir Fostolfr ok Þróttolfr v&aoacute;go <anchor id=a133.9>við Grinda-l&oeacute;k; ok Skarpheðinn, es þeir Digr-Ormr v&aoacute;go í Vatz-skarðe; <anchor id=a133.10>ok Húnr&oelig;ðr, faðor Márs, f&aolig;ðor Hafliða.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=6.4><anchor id=a133.11><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hollte hét maðr, es nam Langa-dal ofan frá Móberge, ok bió <anchor id=a133.12>á Holta-st&aolig;ðom.  Hann vas faðer Ísr&oelig;ðar, f&aolig;ðor Ísleifs, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a133.13>Þórvallz, f&aolig;ðor Þórarens (ens) Spaka. Dótter Þórvallz vas Þórdís, <anchor id=a133.14>es átte Halldórr, son Snorra Goða; þeirra d&oeacute;ttr vóro þær Þórkatla, <anchor id=a133.15>es átte Goðlaugr Þórfinnz son í Straums-firðe. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Þaðan ero<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a133.16>Sturlungar komner ok Odda-verjar.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi> Onnor (dótter) vas Goðrún, <anchor id=a133.17>es átte Ceartan, son Ásgeirs í Vatz-firðe. Þeirra son Þórvalldr, <anchor id=a133.18>faðer Þórðar í Vatz-firðe, ok Ingeríðr, es Goðleifr prestr átte<note place=apparatus id=an133.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>faðer Þ.... átte]</ab> blank in Cd.; faðer Þórðar í Vatz-firðe, filled in from Sturl. vii. ch. 1; the rest from S.</note>.

<p n=6.5><anchor id=a133.19><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Holmgongo-Máne hét maðr, es nam Skaga-str&aolig;nd fyr vestan <anchor id=a133.20>inn til Fors-ár; en fyr austan til Mána-þúfo; ok bió í Mána-vík:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a133.21>hans dóttor átte Þórbrandr í D&aolig;lom, faðer Mána, f&aolig;ðor Kalfs skalldz.

<p n=6.6><anchor id=a133.22><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Eilífr Orn hét maðr, son Atla, Skíða sonar ens Gamla, <anchor id=a134.1><pb id=pb134 n=134><note place=margin>[188: iii. 6.]</note>Bárðar sonar í Ál: Eilífr nam land inn<note place=apparatus id=an134.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>inn]</ab> add. S.</note> frá Mána-þúfo til Gongo-skarz-ár, <anchor id=a134.2>ok Laxár-dal, ok bió þar. Hann átte Þórlaugo dóttor <anchor id=a134.3>Sæmundar í Hlíð: þeirra syner vóro þeir Solmundr, faðer Goðmundar, <anchor id=a134.4>f&aolig;ðor (þeirra) Víga-Barða, ok br&oeacute;ðra hans<note place=apparatus id=an134.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok br&oeacute;ðra hans]</ab> add. S.</note>. Annarr vas <anchor id=a134.5>Atle enn Ramme, es átte Herdíse, dóttor Þórðar frá H&aolig;fða: þeirra<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a134.6>b&aolig;rn vóro (þau) Þórlaug, es átte Goðmundr enn Ríke; ok Þórarenn, <anchor id=a134.7>es átte H&aolig;llo, dóttor Iorundar Hals; þeirra son vas Styrbi&aolig;rn, <anchor id=a134.8>es átte Yngvillde, dóttor Steinr&oelig;ðar, Heðins sonar frá <anchor id=a134.9>Heðins-h&aolig;fða; þeirra dótter Arndís, es átte Hamall, Þormóðs son, <anchor id=a134.10>Þórkels sonar Mána. Son Eilífs Arnar vas Coðran at Gilj-&aoacute;, faðer<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a134.11>Þórvallz Víðf&aolig;rla; ok Þióðolfr Goðe at Hofe á Skaga-str&aolig;nd; ok <anchor id=a134.12>Eysteinn, faðer Þórvallz Tinteins, ok Þórsteins Heiðmennings, ok <anchor id=a134.13>Arnar í Fliótom<note place=apparatus id=an134.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Þórsteins ... Fliótom]</ab> add. S.</note>.


<p n=7.1><anchor id=a134.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Sæmundr enn Suðreyske, félage Ingimundar ens <anchor id=a134.15>Gamla, sem ritið es: hann kom skipe síno í G&aolig;ngo-skarz-ár-ós.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a134.16>Sæmundr nam Sæmundar-hlíð alla til Vatz-skarz fyr <anchor id=a134.17>ofan Sæmundar-l&oeacute;k, ok bió á Geirmundar-st&aolig;ðom. Hans son vas <anchor id=a134.18>Geirmundr, es þar bió síðan. Dótter Sæmundar vas Regin-leif, es <anchor id=a134.19>átte Þóroddr Hialmr: þeirra dótter Hallbera, móðer Goðmundar <anchor id=a134.20>ens Rík<hi>j</hi>a, f&aolig;ðor Eyjolfs, f&aolig;ðor Þóreyjar, móðor Sæmundar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>ens<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a134.21>Fróða<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. Arnalldr hét annarr son Sæmundar, faðer Riúpo, es átte <anchor id=a135.1><pb id=pb135 n=135><note place=margin>[189: iii. 6.]</note>Þórgeirr, son Þórðar frá H&aolig;fða: þeirra son vas Halldórr frá <anchor id=a135.2>Hofe.

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a135.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Skefill hét maðr, es skipe síno kom í G&aolig;ngo-skarz-ár-ós á <anchor id=a135.4>enne s&aolig;mo viko ok Sæmundr.  En meðan Sæmundr fór elde um <anchor id=a135.5>land-nám sétt, þá nam Skefill land allt fyr útan Sauð-&aoacute;; hann tók<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a135.6>þat af land-náme Sæmundar at úlofe hans; ok let Sæmundr þat <anchor id=a135.7>vesa svá buet.

<p n=7.3><anchor id=a135.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ulfliótr hét maðr; hann nam Langa-holt allt fyr neðan <anchor id=a135.9>Sæmundar-l&oeacute;k.

<p n=7.4><anchor id=a135.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórkell Vingner, Atla son, Skíða sonar ens Gamla; hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a135.11>nam land um Vatz-skarð allt, ok Svart-ár-dal. Hans son vas <anchor id=a135.12>Arnmóðr enn Skiálge, faðer Gallta, f&aolig;ðor Þórgeirs, f&aolig;ðor Styr&shy;mess, <anchor id=a135.13>f&aolig;ðor Hallz, f&aolig;ðor Colfinno.

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a135.14><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Alfgeirr hét maðr, es nam land um Alfgeirs-v&aolig;llo, ok upp <anchor id=a135.15>til Mæli-fellz-ár, ok bió á Alfgeirs-v&aolig;llom.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=7.6><anchor id=a135.16><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Maðr het Þórviðr, sa es land nam upp frá Mæli-fellz-&aoacute; til <anchor id=a135.17>Gilj-ár.

<p n=7.7><anchor id=a135.18><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Hrosskell hét maðr, es nam Svartár-dal allan, ok Ýrar-fellz-l&aolig;nd <anchor id=a135.19>&aolig;ll með ráðe Eiriks. Hann nam ofan til Gil-haga; ok bió <anchor id=a135.20>at Ýrar-felle. Hann átte þræl þann es Roðrekr<note place=apparatus id=an135.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> roprekr, Cd.</note> hét; hann sende<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a135.21>hann upp efter Mæli-fellz-dale í landa-leiton, suðr á Kiol. Hann <anchor id=a135.22>kom til gils þess es verðr suðr frá Mæli-fellz-dale, ok nú heiter <anchor id=a136.1><pb id=pb136 n=136><note place=margin>[190: iii. 7.]</note>Rodreks-gil<note place=apparatus id=an136.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> S; Roreks, Cd.</note>; þar sette hann niðr staf ný-birkðan, es þeir k&aolig;lloðo <anchor id=a136.2>land-k&aolig;nnoð. Efter þat hvarf hann aftr.

<p n=7.8><anchor id=a136.3><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Vékell enn Hamrame hét maðr, es land nam ofan frá Gilj-&aoacute;, <anchor id=a136.4>til Mæle-fellz-ár, ok bió at Mæle-felle. Hann spurðe<note place=apparatus id=an136.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>spurðe]</ab> S; spottaðe, Cd.</note> ferð Hroðreks<note place=apparatus id=an136.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> S; Rærex, Cd.</note>, <anchor id=a136.5>ok fór lítlo síðarr suðr á fiall í landa-leiton. Hann kom til hauga<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a136.6>þeirra es nú heita Vékels-haugar; hann skaut miðle hauganna; <anchor id=a136.7>hann hvarf þaðan aftr.

<p n=7.8.1><anchor id=a136.8>En es þat spurðe Eirikr í Goðd&aolig;lom, sende hann þræl sínn suðr <anchor id=a136.9>á fiall, es hét Ronguðr; fór hann enn í landa-leit. Hann kom <anchor id=a136.10>suðr til Blondo kvísla; ok fór síðan upp með &aoacute; þeirre es fellr fyr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a136.11>vestan Vinverja-dal, ok vestr á hraunet miðle Reykja-valla ok <anchor id=a136.12>Kialar; ok kom þar á mannz-spor, ok skilðe at þau l&aoacute;go sunnan <anchor id=a136.13>at. Hann hlóð þar v&aolig;rðo þá, es nú heiter Rangaðar-varða. Þaðan <anchor id=a136.14>fór hann aftr, ok gaf Eirikr hónom frelse fyrer ferð sína. En <anchor id=a136.15>þaðan af tókosk upp ferðer um fiallet miðle Sunnlendinga<note place=apparatus id=an136.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> Sunnlendinga fiórðungs, S.</note> ok Norðlendinga.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>


<p n=8.1><anchor id=a136.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Eirikr hét maðr ágætr. Hann fór af Norege til <anchor id=a136.17>Íslannz. Hann vas son Hroallz<note place=apparatus id=an136.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> S; Rohallz, Cd.</note>, Geirmundar sonar, <anchor id=a136.18>Eiriks sonar Orðig-skeggia. Eirikr nam land frá Gilj-&aoacute;, ok Goð-dala<note place=apparatus id=an136.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> um Goðdale alla, S.</note> <anchor id=a136.20>ok ofan til Norðr-ár; ok bió at Hofe í Goðd&aolig;lom. Hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a136.21>átte Þórríðe, dóttor Þórðar Skeggja, systor Helgo, es Ketilbi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a137.1><pb id=pb137 n=137><note place=margin>[192: iii. 7.]</note>enn Gamle átte at Mosfelle. B&aolig;rn þeirra Eiriks vóro þau Þórkell, <anchor id=a137.2>ok Hroalldr, Þórgeirr, ok Holmgongo-Starre, ok Gunnilldr. Þórgeirr <anchor id=a137.3>Eiriks son átte Yngvilde, Þórgeirs dóttor: þeirra dótter <anchor id=a137.4>Rannveig, es átte Biarne Brodd-Helga son. Gunnillde Eiriks <anchor id=a137.5>dóttor átte Vefr&oelig;ðr Ævars son<note place=apparatus id=an137.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gunnillde ... Ævars son]</ab> add. S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a137.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Kr&aoacute;ko-Hreiðarr hét maðr, son Úfeigs<note place=apparatus id=an137.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Úfeigs]</ab> Olafs, S.</note> Laf-skeggs, &OElig;xna-Þóres-sonar. <anchor id=a137.7>Þeir feðgar bioggo skip sítt ok<note place=apparatus id=an137.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bioggo ... ok]</ab> add. S.</note> siglðo til Íslannz. <anchor id=a137.8>Ok es þeir kómo í land-sýn, geck Hreiðarr til siglo; ok kvazk <anchor id=a137.9>eige mundu kasta &aolig;ndogis-súlom sínom fyr borð; kvezk þat þykkja <anchor id=a137.10>úmerkilegt at g&oelig;ra ráð sítt efter því: kvezk heldr mundo heita<note place=apparatus id=an137.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>heita]</ab> S; leita, Cd.</note> á<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a137.11>Þór, at hann vísaðe hónom til landa; ok kvazk þar mundu berjask <anchor id=a137.12>til landa ef<note place=apparatus id=an137.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>landa ef]</ab> S; er, Cd.</note> áðr v&aolig;re numet. En hann kom í Skaga-fi&aolig;rð, ok <anchor id=a137.13>siglðe upp á Borgar-sand til brotz. Hávarðr Hegre kom til hans, <anchor id=a137.14>ok bauð hónom til sin; ok þar vas hann um vet<hi>t</hi>renn í <anchor id=a137.15>Hegranese.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a137.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Um váret spurðe Hávarðr, hvat hann vilde ráða sínna; en <anchor id=a137.17>hann kvezk ætla at berjask við Sæmund til landa. En Hávarðr <anchor id=a137.18>latte, ok kvað þat ílla gefizk hafa; bað hann fara á fund Eiriks <anchor id=a137.19>í Goðd&aolig;lom, &lsquo;ok tak r&aoacute;ð af hónom, þvi at hann es vitrastr maðr <anchor id=a137.20>í héraðe þesso.<note place=apparatus id=an137.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þvi at ... þesso]</ab> add. S.</note>&rsquo; Hreiðarr g&oelig;rðe svá. En es hann fann Eirik,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a137.21>latte hann þessa ófriðar, ok kvað úheyrt<note place=apparatus id=an137.7><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>úheyrt]</ab> S; eigi ráð, Cd.</note>, at menn deilðe, meðan <anchor id=a138.1><pb id=pb138 n=138><note place=margin>[193: iii. 8.]</note>svá mann-fátt være á, landeno; kvezk helldr vilja gefa hónom Tungona <anchor id=a138.2>alla niðr frá Skála-mýre, ok kvað Þór þangat hafa vísat <anchor id=a138.3>hónom; ok þar hafa horft á stafn<note place=apparatus id=an138.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> S; stafni, Cd.</note> hans, es hann siglðe (upp) á <anchor id=a138.4>Borgar-sand; kvað hónom<note place=apparatus id=an138.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-sand ... sonom]</ab> add. S.</note> &oeacute;ret þat land-nám ok hans sonom. Þann <anchor id=a138.5>kost þá<note place=apparatus id=an138.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá]</ab> Þektiz, S.</note> Hreiðarr, ok bió á Steins-st&aolig;ðom. Hann kauss at deyja<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a138.6>í Mæli-fell. Hans son vas Ófeigr Þunn-skeggr, faðer Biarnar, <anchor id=a138.7>f&aolig;ðor Tungo-Steins.

<p n=8.4><anchor id=a138.8><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Maðr hét Hialmolfr, es nam land ofan um Blondo-hlíð. <anchor id=a138.9>Hans son vas Þórgrímr Cugge<note place=apparatus id=an138.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> kuge, S.</note>, faðer Oddz í Axlar-haga, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a138.10>Sela-Kalfs.&mdash;Þaðan ero Axlhegingar.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=8.5><anchor id=a138.11><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Onundr Vís hét maðr, es land nam upp frá Merki-gile, enn <anchor id=a138.12>Eystra-dal allt fyr austan. En þá es Eirikr vilde til fara at nema <anchor id=a138.13>land um dalenn allt fyr vestan<note place=apparatus id=an138.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> nema land um dalenn allan, S.</note>, þá fellde Onundr blót-sp&aoacute;n til, at <anchor id=a138.14>hann skyllde verða víss<note place=apparatus id=an138.6><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at hann ... víss]</ab> add. S.</note>, hvern tíma Eirikr m&oelig;nde til fara at nema; <anchor id=a138.15>ok varð þá Onundr skiótare; ok skaut tundr-&aolig;ro yfer &aoacute;na, ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a138.16>helgaðe ser svá landet fyr vestan; ok bió miðle á.

<p n=8.6><anchor id=a138.17><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Cáre hét maðr, es nam land á miðle Norðr-ár ok Merki-gils; <anchor id=a138.18>ok bió í Flata-tungo.&mdash;Hann vas kallaðr Tungo-Cáre.&mdash;Frá <anchor id=a138.19>hónom ero Silfr-st&oeacute;ðingar komner.

<p n=8.7><anchor id=a138.20><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þórbrandr Orrecr<note place=apparatus id=an138.7><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Aurrek, S.</note> nam land upp frá Bólstaðar-&aoacute;, Silfra-staða-hlíð<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a138.21>alla, ok Norðrár-dal fyr norðan, ok bió á Þórbrannz-st&aolig;ðom; <anchor id=a139.1><pb id=pb139 n=139><note place=margin>[194: iii. 8.]</note>ok lét þar g&oelig;ra elld-hús svá mikit at aller þeir menn es þeim <anchor id=a139.2>megin fóro um dalenn, skyldo þar bera klyfjar í g&oelig;gnom; ok <anchor id=a139.3>vesa ollom matr heimoll.&mdash;Við hann es kennd Orrecs-heiðr upp <anchor id=a139.4>frá<note place=apparatus id=an139.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>upp frá]</ab> here come in 7 continuous vellum leaves.</note> H&oelig;ko-st&aolig;ðom. Hann vas g&aolig;fogr maðr ok kyn-stórr.

<p n=8.8><anchor id=a139.5><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þórer<note place=apparatus id=an139.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórer]</ab> S; Þórðr, H, here and once below.</note> Dúfo-nef, vas leysinge &OElig;xna-Þóriss. Hann kom skipe<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a139.6>síno í G&aolig;ngo-skarz-ár-ós. Þar vas bygt hérað allt fyr vestan; <anchor id=a139.7>hann fór norðr yfer I&aolig;kols-&aoacute; at Land-brote, ok nam land miðle <anchor id=a139.8>Glóða-feykiss-ár ok Diúp-ár, ok bió á Flugo-mýre.

<p n=8.9><anchor id=a139.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Í þann tíma (kom) út skip í Kolbeins-ár-óse, hlaðet kvik-fé. <anchor id=a139.10>En þeim hvarf í Brim-nes-skógom ung-hrysse eitt. En Þórer<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a139.11>Dúfo-nef keypte vónena, ok fann síðan<note place=apparatus id=an139.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>síðan]</ab> add. S.</note>. Þat vas allra hrossa <anchor id=a139.12>skiótast, ok hét Fluga. Orn hét maðr, es fór lannz-horna í miðle; <anchor id=a139.13>hann vas fi&aolig;l-kunnegr; hann sat fyre Þóre í Vinverja-dale es hann <anchor id=a139.14>skyllde fara suðr of Ki&aolig;l; ok veðjaðe við Þóre, hvárr þeirra eiga <anchor id=a139.15>m&oelig;nde hross skiótara; þvi at hann átte all-góðan hest; ok lagðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a139.16>hvárr þeirra við hundrað silfrs. Þeir riðo báðer suðr um Ki&aolig;l, <anchor id=a139.17>þar til es þeir kómo á skeið þat es nú heiter Dúfo-ness-skeið. En <anchor id=a139.18>eige vas minne skiótleiks munr hrossa, an Þórer kom í móte Erne á <anchor id=a139.19>miðjo skeiðe. Orn unðe svá ílla við fé-lát sítt, at hann vilde eige <anchor id=a139.20>lifa; ok fór upp under Arnar-fell, ok týnde ser þar<note place=apparatus id=an139.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ser þar]</ab> scalfr, add. S.</note>; en Fluga stóð<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a140.1><pb id=pb140 n=140><note place=margin>[195: iii. 9.]</note>þar efter, þvi at hon vas miok móð. En es Þórer fór af þinge, <anchor id=a140.2>farm hann hest f&aolig;xóttan, grán hiá Flugo: við þeim hafðe hon <anchor id=a140.3>fenget. Under þeim vas alenn Eið-faxe, es útan vas f&oeacute;rðr<note place=apparatus id=an140.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas f&oeacute;rðr]</ab> S; fór, vell.</note>, ok <anchor id=a140.4>varð siau manna bane við Miors<note place=apparatus id=an140.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> S; Mors, vell.</note> á eínom dege; ok lézk hann <anchor id=a140.5>sialfr þar. Fluga týndisk í fene á Flugo-mýre.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=8.10><anchor id=a140.6><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Collsveinn enn Ramme hét maðr, es land nam á miðle <anchor id=a140.7>Þver-ár ok Gliúfr-ár ok bió á Collsveins-st&aolig;ðom upp frá Þver-&aoacute;. <anchor id=a140.8>Hann hafðe blót á Hof-st&aolig;ðom.

<p n=8.11><anchor id=a140.9><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Gunnolfr<note place=apparatus id=an140.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Sunnolfr, S.</note> hét maðr. Hann nam land miðle, Þver-ár ok <anchor id=a140.10>Glóða-feykis-ár, ok bió í Hvamme.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>


<p n=9.1><anchor id=a140.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Gormr hét herser ágætr í Svía-ríke<note place=apparatus id=an140.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Svi-þioð, S.</note>; hann átte Þóro, <anchor id=a140.12>dóttor Eiriks konungs at<note place=apparatus id=an140.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> S; af, vell.</note> Upps&aolig;lom. Þorgils hét son <anchor id=a140.13>hans<note place=apparatus id=an140.6><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hans]</ab> þeirra, S. Elinu] S; Eilinu, vell.</note>: hann átte Elinu dóttor Burizlafs konongs or G&aolig;rðom austan, <anchor id=a140.14>ok Ingigerðar<note place=apparatus id=an140.7><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ingigerðar]</ab> S; Ingibiargar, H.</note>, systor Dagstyggs Risa-konungs<note place=apparatus id=an140.8><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Risa-]</ab> thus H, S; read Rúsa <hi>or</hi> Rósa?</note>. Syner þeirra vóro <anchor id=a140.15>þeir Hergrímr ok Herfiðr, es átte Hollo, dóttor Heðins, ok Arn-dísar<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a140.16>Heðins dóttor. Groa hét dótter Herfinnz, ok Hollo; hána <anchor id=a140.17>átte Róarr.

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a140.18><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þeirra son vas Slétto-Biorn, es land nam fyrst<note place=apparatus id=an140.9><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fyrst]</ab> add. S.</note> miðle Griót-ár <anchor id=a140.19>ok Deilðar-ár, áðr þeir Healte ok Kolbeinn kómo út; hann bió á <anchor id=a140.20>Sletto-Biarnar-st&aolig;ðom. Hans son vas<note place=apparatus id=an140.10><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hans son vas]</ab> hann átte (blank), þeirra, etc., S.</note> Ornolfr, es átte Þórliótu,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a141.1><pb id=pb141 n=141><note place=margin>[196: iii. 10.]</note>dóttor Healta Skapls<note place=apparatus id=an141.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1</ab> <ab type=textRef>Skapls]</ab> Skafls s., vell.; Skalfs s., S.</note>; ok Arnbi&aolig;rn, es átte Þórlaugo Þórðar dóttor <anchor id=a141.2>frá H&aolig;fða; ok Arnoddr, es átte Þór-nýjo, dóttor Sigmundar, <anchor id=a141.3>Þórkels sonar es Glúmr vá. Arnfríðr hét dótter Sletto-Biarnar, es <anchor id=a141.4>Spak-B&aolig;ðvarr átte, son Ondotz.

<p n=9.3><anchor id=a141.5><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hann Ondóttr kom út í Kolbeins-ár-óse, ok kauper land at<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a141.6>Sletto-Birne ofan frá Hals-grof enom vestra veg, ok út<note place=apparatus id=an141.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6</ab> <ab type=textRef>út]</ab> S; inn, H.</note> til Kolbeins-ár-óss; <anchor id=a141.7>en enom eystra veg<note place=apparatus id=an141.3 lang="en-UK"><ab type=lineNumRef>7</ab> S reverses &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>eystra megin</foreign>&rsquo; and &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>vestra megin</foreign>.&rsquo;</note> ofan frá l&oeacute;k þeim es verðr út frá <anchor id=a141.8>Nauta-bue, ok inn til Gliúfr-ár, ok bió í Við-vík.

<p n=9.4><anchor id=a141.9><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Sigmundr á Vestfold átte Ingibi&aolig;rgo, dóttor Rauðs Ruggo í <anchor id=a141.10>Naumo-dale, systor Þórsteins svorfuðar<note place=apparatus id=an141.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10</ab> svarbaðar, S.</note>: þeirra son vas Kolbeinn.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a141.11>Hann fór til Íslannz, ok nam land miðle Griót-ár ok Deilðar-ár, <anchor id=a141.12>Kolbeins-dal, ok Healta-dal.


<p n=10.1><anchor id=a141.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Healte</hi>, son Þórðar Skapls<note place=apparatus id=an141.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13</ab> <ab type=textRef>Skapls]</ab> thus vell.; Skafls, S.</note>, kom til Íslannz, ok <anchor id=a141.14>nam Healta-dal at ráðe Kolbeins, ok bió at Hofe: <anchor id=a141.15>hans syner vóro þeir Þórvalldr, ok Þórðr<note place=apparatus id=an141.6><ab type=lineNumRef>15</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórðr]</ab> Grett. Saga (S&ast;) names two sons of his, Þorbiorn Ongul and Healte, and a daughter Þórdís. ágæter menn] add. S.</note>, ágæter menn.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a141.16><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þat hefer erfe veret ágætz á Íslande, es þeir erfðo f&aolig;ðor sínn. <anchor id=a141.17>Þeir buðo &aolig;llom h&aolig;fðingjom á Íslande: vóro þar M.CC. boðs-manna; <anchor id=a141.18>ok vóro aller vírðinga-menn gi&aolig;fom út leidder. At því <anchor id=a141.19>erfe f&oeacute;rðe Oddr Breiðfirðingr dr&aoacute;po þá es hann hafðe ort um <anchor id=a141.20>Healta. Áðr hafðe Glúmr Geira son stemnt Odde um á-nyt<note place=apparatus id=an141.7><ab type=lineNumRef>20</ab> <ab type=textRef>á-nyt]</ab> thus also S and S&ast; (Barðar Saga).</note> til<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a142.1><pb id=pb142 n=142><note place=margin>[198: iii. 10.]</note>Þorska-fiarðar-þings. Þá um váret fóro Healta syner norðan á skipe <anchor id=a142.2>til Steingríms-fiarðar, ok gengo norðan um heiðina þar sem nú es <anchor id=a142.3>k&aolig;lloð Healt-d&oeacute;la-laut. En es þeír gengo á þinget, vóro þeir svá <anchor id=a142.4>vel búner, at menn hugðo at Æser være þar komner. Þar um es <anchor id=a142.5>betta kveðit:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a142.6>Mange hugðe manna ...
</lg>

<p n=10.2.1><anchor id=a142.7>Frá Healta sonom es mikil ætt komen<note place=apparatus id=an142.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>komen]</ab> ok gofug, add. S.</note>.


<p n=11.1><anchor id=a142.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> Þórðr hét maðr ágætr. Hann vas son Biarnar <anchor id=a142.9>Byrðo-smiors, Hroallz sonar Ryggs, Ásleiks sonar, <anchor id=a142.10>Biarnar sonar Iárn-síðo, Ragnars sonar Loðbrókar. Þórðr fór til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a142.11>Íslannz ok nam H&aolig;fða-str&aolig;nd í Skaga-firðe, á miðle Una-dals-ár, <anchor id=a142.12>ok Hrolleifs-dals-ár, ok bió at<note place=apparatus id=an142.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok bió at]</ab> S; om. vell.</note> H&aolig;fða.

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a142.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þórðr átte Friðgerðe, dóttor Þóris Himo<note place=apparatus id=an142.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Hyrnu, S.</note>, ok Friðgerðar, <anchor id=a142.14>dóttor Cearfals Ira-konungs. Þau &aoacute;tto xix b&aolig;rn.

<p n=11.2.1><anchor id=a142.15>Bi&aolig;rn vas son þeirra, es átte Þóriðe, dóttor Refs frá Barðe; ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a142.16>vóro þeirra b&aolig;rn, Arnórr Kerlingar-nef; ok Þórdís, móðer Orms, <anchor id=a142.17>f&aolig;ðor Þórdísar, móðor Bótolfs.

<p n=11.2.2><anchor id=a142.18>Þórgeirr hét annarr son Þórðar; hann átte Riúpu, dóttor Arnallz, <anchor id=a142.19>Sæmundar sonar; þeirra son vas Halldórr at Hofe<note place=apparatus id=an142.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Halld. at Hofe]</ab> Grett. Saga (S&ast;?) adds, Hann átte Þórdíse Þórðar dóttor systur <anchor id=a142.20>þeirra bræðra Hialta ok Þórbiarnar Onguls.</note>.

<pb id=pb143 n=143><note place=margin>[199: iii. 10.]</note>

<p n=11.2.3><anchor id=a143.1>Snorre vas enn þriðe; hann átte Þórhilde Riúpu, dóttor Þórðar <anchor id=a143.2>Gelliss; þeirra son vas Þórðr Hesth&aolig;fðe, faðer Karls-efnes, es <anchor id=a143.3>fann Vínland<note place=apparatus id=an143.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Vindlð, vell.</note> et Góða, faðer Snorra.

<p n=11.2.4><anchor id=a143.4>Þórvalldr Holbarke vas enn fiórðe son Þórðar; hann kom um <anchor id=a143.5>haust eitt á Þórvarz-staðe á Síðo til Smiðcels, ok dvalðesk þar um<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a143.6>hríð: þá fór hann upp<note place=apparatus id=an143.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>upp]</ab> add. S.</note> til hellisins Surtz, ok f&oeacute;rðe þar dr&aoacute;po þá, <anchor id=a143.7>es hann hafðe ort um Iotunenn í hellenom. Síðan feck hann dóttor <anchor id=a143.8>Smiðcels; ok vas þeirra dótter Iórunn, móðer Þórbranz í Skarfa-nese<note place=apparatus id=an143.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Skarfs-n., S.</note>.

<p n=11.2.5><anchor id=a143.10>Bárðr vas enn fimte son Þórðar: hann átte Þór&aolig;rno, dóttor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a143.11>Þóroddz Hialms. Þeirra son vas Dagæ<note place=apparatus id=an143.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Dagæ]</ab> thus vell.; Dade, S.</note> Skálld.

<p n=11.2.6><anchor id=a143.12>Soxolfr vas enn sétte son Þórðar; siaunde Þórgrímr; átte <anchor id=a143.13><hi>H</hi>róarr; nionde Cnorr; tionde Þórmóðr Scalle; ellefte Steinn.

<p n=11.2.7><anchor id=a143.14>D&oeacute;ttr Þórðar vóro þær Þórlaug, es átte Arnbi&aolig;rn Sletto-Biarnar <anchor id=a143.15>son; þeirra dótter Giaflaug<note place=apparatus id=an143.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Giaflaug]</ab> Laxd. Saga, ch. 20; Gudlaug, Cd.</note>, es átte Þórleikr Hoskullz son; þeirra<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a143.16>son Bolle. Herdís vas &aolig;nnor dótter Þórðar; hána átte Atle enn <anchor id=a143.17>Ramme: Þórgríma Skeiðar-kinn vas en þriðja: Árnbiorg fiórða: <anchor id=a143.18>Ásgerðr fimta<note place=apparatus id=an143.6><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ásgerðr fimta]</ab> om. Cd.</note>: sétta Arnleif: siaunda Þóríðr: átta Friðgerðr í <anchor id=a143.19>Hvamme.

<p n=11.3><anchor id=a143.20><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hrolleifr enn mikle bygðe Hrolleifs-dal, sem ritið es, áðr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a144.1><pb id=pb144 n=144><note place=margin>[200: iii. 11.]</note>Þórðr g&oelig;rðe hann norðan fyr víg Oddz Una sonar. Þá fór hann <anchor id=a144.2>í Vatz-dal.

<p n=11.4><anchor id=a144.3><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Friðleifr hét maðr, Gauzkr at f&aolig;ðor-ætt; en Bryngerðr hét <anchor id=a144.4>móðer hans, ok vas hon Flæmsk<note place=apparatus id=an144.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Flamsk, S.</note>. Friðleifr nam Slétta-hlíð alla <anchor id=a144.5>ok Friðleifs-dal miðle Friðleifs-dals-ár ok Staf-ár, ok bió í Holte.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a144.6>Hans son vas Þióðarr, faðer Ara, ok Bryngerðar, móðor Tungo-Steins.

<p n=11.5><anchor id=a144.7><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Flóke, son Vilgerðar, H&aolig;rða-Kára dóttor, fór til Íslannz ok <anchor id=a144.8>nam Flóka-dal miðle Flóka-dals-ár ok Reykjar-hóls. Hann bió at <anchor id=a144.10>Móe. Flóke átte Gró, systor Þórðar frá H&aolig;fða; þeirra son vas<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a144.11>Oddleifr<note place=apparatus id=an144.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Olleifr, vell.</note> Stafr, es bió á Stafs-hóle, ok deilðe við Healta sono. <anchor id=a144.12>Dótter Flóka vas Þióðgerðr, móðer Coðrans, f&aolig;ðor Þióðgerðar, <anchor id=a144.13>móðor Coðrans, f&aolig;ðor Cárs í Vatz-dale.


<p n=12.1><anchor id=a144.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> Þórðr Knappr hét maðr Sygnskr<note place=apparatus id=an144.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sygnskr]</ab> S; Sonskr, vell. (as it seems).  systor-son] son, S.</note>, systor-son Biarnar <anchor id=a144.15>at Hauge: en annarr hét Nafr-Helgi.  Þeir fóro<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a144.16>sam-skipa til Íslannz, ok kómo við Haga-nes. Þórðr nam land <anchor id=a144.17>upp frá Stíflo til Tungo-ár, ok bió at<note place=apparatus id=an144.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> á, S.</note> Knapp-st&aolig;ðom. Hann átte Æso, <anchor id=a144.18>dóttor Liótolfs Goða: þeirra son vas Hafr, es átte Þóríðe, dóttor <anchor id=a144.19>Þórkels or Goðd&aolig;lom: þeirra son vas Þórarenn, faðer Ófeigs.

<p n=12.2><anchor id=a144.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Nafar-Helge nam land fyr austan, upp frá Haga-nese til<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a144.21>Flóka-dals-ár, fyr neðan Barð, ok upp til Tungo-ár, ok bió á <anchor id=a145.1><pb id=pb145 n=145><note place=margin>[201: iii. 11.]</note>Grindle. Hann átte Gró ena Skygno: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau <anchor id=a145.2>Þórolfr<note place=apparatus id=an145.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2</ab> Þórhrolfr, S.</note> Karl-h&aolig;fðe; ok annarr Arnórr<note place=apparatus id=an145.2><ab type=textRef>Arnórr]</ab> S; Arvn, vell.</note>, es barðesk við Friðleif á <anchor id=a145.3>Stafs-hóle: ok Þórgerðr, es átte Geirmundr, Sæmundar son; ok <anchor id=a145.4>Ulfhildr<note place=apparatus id=an145.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4</ab> Olhildr, S.</note>, es átte Arnórr Skefils son í G&aolig;ngo-Skarðe: þeirra son <anchor id=a145.5>vas Þórgeirr Ofláte, es vá Blót-Már<note place=apparatus id=an145.4><ab type=lineNumRef>5</ab> -má, vell.</note> at Móberge. Þórunn Blá-kinn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a145.6>(vas) ein.

<p n=12.3><anchor id=a145.7><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Bárðr Suðreyingr nam land upp frá Stíflo til Mióva-dals-ár: <anchor id=a145.8>hans son vas Hallr Mió-d&oeacute;lingr, faðer Þóríðar, es átte Arnórr <anchor id=a145.9>Kerlingar-nef.

<p n=12.4><anchor id=a145.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Brúne enn Hvíte hét maðr ágætr<note place=apparatus id=an145.5><ab type=lineNumRef>10</ab> <ab type=textRef>hét maðr ágætr]</ab> add. S.</note>, son Háreks Upplendinga-iarls.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a145.11>Hann fór til Íslannz af fýse sínne; ok nam land á miðle <anchor id=a145.12>Mióva-dals-ár ok Ulfs-dala: hann bió á Brúna-st&aolig;ðom. Hann <anchor id=a145.13>átte Arnóro, dóttor Þórgeirs ens Óða, Liótolfs sonar Goða: þeirra <anchor id=a145.14>syner vóro þeir Ketill; ok Ulfheðinn; ok Þórðr, es Barðverjar ero <anchor id=a145.15>frá komner.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=12.5><anchor id=a145.16><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Ulfr víkingr, ok Óláfr Beckr, fóro sam-skipa til Íslannz. Ulfr <anchor id=a145.17>nam Ulfs-dala, ok bió þar.

<p n=12.6><anchor id=a145.18><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Óláfr Beckr vas son Karls or Biark-ey af Háloga-lande: <anchor id=a145.19>hann vá Þóre enn Svarta<note place=apparatus id=an145.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19</ab> S; sva(rta), Cd., hole in the vellum.</note>, ok varð fyr þat út-lagr. Óláfr nam alla <anchor id=a145.20>Dala<note place=apparatus id=an145.7><ab type=lineNumRef>20</ab> <ab type=textRef>Dala]</ab> thus vell.</note> fyr vestan, ok Óláfs-fi&aolig;rð suman til mótz<note place=apparatus id=an145.8><ab type=textRef>mólz]</ab> moðs, vell.</note> við Þórmóð, (ok)<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a145.21>bió at Kvia-beck: hans syner vóro þeir Steinolfr<note place=apparatus id=an145.9><ab type=lineNumRef>21</ab> Steinmóðr, S.</note>, faðer Biarnar; <anchor id=a145.22>ok Grímolfr; ok Arnoddr, faðer Vilborgar, móðor Karls ens Rauða


<pb id=pb146 n=146><note place=margin>[202: iii. 12.]</note>

<p n=12.7><anchor id=a146.1><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þórmóðr enn Ramme hét maðr Svænskr<note place=apparatus id=an146.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Read Sygnskr? om. S.</note>; hann vá Gyrð, <anchor id=a146.2>móðor-f&aolig;ðor Skialgs<note place=apparatus id=an146.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Skialx, vell.</note> á Iaðre, ok varð fyr þat land-flótte fyr Birne <anchor id=a146.3>konunge at Hauge. Hann fór til Íslannz, ok kom skipe síno í <anchor id=a146.4>Siglo-fi&aolig;rð, ok siglðe inn á Þórmoðs-eyre; ok kallaðe af því <anchor id=a146.5>Siglo-fi&aolig;rð, ok Siglo-nes. Hann nam Siglo-fi&aolig;rð allan á miðle<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a146.6>Ulf<hi>s</hi>-dala ok Hvann-dala. Hann bió á Siglo-nese. Hann deilðe <anchor id=a146.7>um Hvann-dala við Óláf Beck; ok varð siautián<note place=apparatus id=an146.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> xvj, S.</note> manna bane, áðr <anchor id=a146.8>þeir sættosk; en þá skylde sítt sumar hvárr hafa. Þórmóðr vas <anchor id=a146.9>son Harallz Víkings, es<note place=apparatus id=an146.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es]</ab> en hann, S.</note> átte Arngerðe, dóttor Skíða or Skíða-dale: <anchor id=a146.10>þeirra syner vóro þeir Arngeirr enn Hvasse, ok Narfe, faðer Þróndar,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a146.11>f&aolig;ðor Hríseyjar-Narva ok Alrekr, es barðesk í Slétta-hlíð við <anchor id=a146.12>Cn&aolig;rr Þórðar son.

<p n=12.8><anchor id=a146.13><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Gunnolfr enn Gamle, son Þórbiarnar Þiótz<note place=apparatus id=an146.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Þióz, vell.; Þióta, S.</note> or Sogne: hann <anchor id=a146.14>vá Végeir, f&aolig;ðor Vébiarnar Sygna-kappa, ok fór síðan til Íslannz. <anchor id=a146.15>Hann nam Óláfs-fi&aolig;rð fyr austan<note place=apparatus id=an146.6><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>austan]</ab> vestan, S. upp] add. S.</note> upp til Reykja-ár, ok út til Vámúla,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a146.16>ok bió at Gunnolfs-&aoacute;. Hann átte Gró, dóttor Þórvarz frá <anchor id=a146.17>Urðom: þeirra syner vóro þeir Steinolfr, ok Þórer<note place=apparatus id=an146.7><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Þórer]</ab> S; om. H. (Þórg)rímr, hole in the vell.</note>, ok Þórgrímr.


<p n=13.1><anchor id=a146.18><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> Biorn hét maðr ágætr á Gaut-lande, son Hrólfs frá <anchor id=a146.19>Ám; hann átte Hlíf, dóttor Hrólfs, Ingiallz sonar, <anchor id=a146.20>Fróða sonar konongs.&mdash;Starkaðr enn Gamle vas skáld beggja<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a146.21>þeirra.&mdash;Eyvindr hét son þeirra.

<pb id=pb147 n=147><note place=margin>[204: iii. 12.]</note>

<p n=13.2><anchor id=a147.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Biorn varð ú-sáttr um i&aolig;rð við Sigfast<note place=apparatus id=an147.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sigfast]</ab> S; Sigvat, vell. here, but Sigfast below. Solvers, S.</note>, mág Solvars <anchor id=a147.2>Gauta-konungs<note place=apparatus id=an147.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gauta-kgs.]</ab> H, S; read Gauta iarls?</note>. Sigfastr gaf dóttor sína Solvare: helt iarlenn<note place=apparatus id=an147.3>helt iarlenn] hann helt, S.</note> (!) <anchor id=a147.3>Sigfast svá fast, at hann hélt með ofríke &aolig;llom i&aolig;rðom Biarnar. <anchor id=a147.4>Þá selðe Bi&aolig;rn í h&aolig;nd Hlífo, kono sínne, allt sítt góz, ok Eyvinde <anchor id=a147.5>syne sínom á Gaut-lande; en Bi&aolig;rn bar austan á tolf hestom silfr.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a147.6>Síðan brende hann Sigfast inne með þriá tigo manna næsto nótt <anchor id=a147.7>áðr hann f&oelig;re<note place=apparatus id=an147.4><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f&oelig;re]</ab> fór, vell.</note> or lande. Þá fór hann til Noregs: hann kom vestr <anchor id=a147.8>á Agðer í Hvine til Gríms hersiss, Kolbiarnar sonar Sneypis, <anchor id=a147.9>bróðor Ingiallz ens Tryggva frænda Arinbiarnar í Fi&aolig;rðom; ok <anchor id=a147.10>tók hann all-vel við hónom. Bi&aolig;rn ok f&aolig;ro-nautar hans vóro um<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a147.11>vettrenn með Gríme. En es á leið um váret eina nótt, vas þat at maðr <anchor id=a147.12>stóð yfer hónom með brugðet sverð, ok vilde leggja á hónom; <anchor id=a147.13>hann tók hann h&aolig;ndom, ok hafðe sá fé teket af Gríme til h&aolig;foðs <anchor id=a147.14>hónom; eige drap <sic>hann hann</sic>. Grímr vilde svíkja hann til fiár. Því <anchor id=a147.15>fór Bi&aolig;rn braut ok til Ondotz Kr&aoacute;ko, es bió í Hvinis-firðe á Ogðom<note place=apparatus id=an147.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á Ogðom]</ab> add. S.</note>,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a147.16>son Erlings Knýtis. Ondóttr átte Signýjo, Sigvatz dóttor or Hlíðom <anchor id=a147.17>or Vík austan. Bi&aolig;rn fór í vestr-víking á sumrom; en vas með <anchor id=a147.18>Ondótte um vetrom. Þá andaðesk Hlíf á Gaut-lande. Bi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a147.19>feck þá Helgo, systor Ondóttz. Þeirra son vas Þróndr Miok-siglande. <anchor id=a147.20>Síðan kom Eyvindr austan til f&aolig;ðor síns Biarnar, hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a148.1><pb id=pb148 n=148><note place=margin>[206: iii. 12.]</note>vas son Hlífar. Hann tók við her-skipom f&aolig;ðor síns, ok þeirre <anchor id=a148.2>iðn, es hann hafðe haft, þá es hónom leiddesk hernoðr.

<p n=13.2.1><anchor id=a148.3>Eyvindr feck síðan á Írlande Raforto, dóttor Cearvals konungs. <anchor id=a148.4>Hon ól svein í Suðreyjom, ok selðe þar til fóstrs. Tveimr<note place=apparatus id=an148.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Tveimr]</ab> ij, vell.</note> vetrom <anchor id=a148.5>síðarr kómo þau aftr til eyjanna at vitja sveinsins; ok s&aoacute; þar svein<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a148.6>cygðan vel, ok ecki hold á; þvi at hann vas svelltr. Þau k&aolig;lloðo <anchor id=a148.7>sveinenn af því Helga enn magra. Hann vas síðan fóstraðr á <anchor id=a148.8>Írlande. Eyvindr vas því kallaðr Austmaðr, at hann kom austan <anchor id=a148.9>af Svia-ríke vestr um haf<note place=apparatus id=an148.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Eyvindr ... haf]</ab> transposed; vell. puts it after fóstrs.</note>.

<p n=13.3><anchor id=a148.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Bi&aolig;rn andaðesk at Ondotz mágs síns; en Grímr talðe konung<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a148.11>eiga at taka allan arf hans, fyrer þvi at hann vas útlendr, en <anchor id=a148.12>Þróndr sonar son<note place=apparatus id=an148.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þróndr sonar son]</ab> emend.; s. s. (i. e. syner), vell.</note> hans fyr vestan haf. Ondóttr hélt féno til handa <anchor id=a148.13>Þrónde systor-syne<note place=apparatus id=an148.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>systor-syne]</ab> emend.; sunar syne, Cd.</note> sínom.

<p n=13.3.1><anchor id=a148.14>Helge f&oeacute;ddesk upp á Írlande: hann feck Þórunnar Hyrno, <anchor id=a148.15>dóttor Ketils Flatnefs or Suðreyjom, ok Yngvildar dóttor Ketils<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a148.16>Veðrs af Hrínga-ríke; ok &aoacute;tto þau m&aolig;rg b&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an148.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok &aoacute;tto þau m. b.]</ab> add. S.</note>.


<p n=14.1><anchor id=a148.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> Síðan fór Helge til Íslannz með kono sína, ok b&aolig;rn, <anchor id=a148.18>Hrólf, ok Ingialld, ok Ingunne, es átte Hámundr <anchor id=a148.19>Heljar-skinn.&mdash;Hann fylgðe enn út Helga. En es Helgi sá land<note place=apparatus id=an148.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>land]</ab> Island, S.</note>, <anchor id=a148.20>geck hann til frétta við Þór hvar hann skylde land taka: en frétten<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a148.21>vísaðe hónom til Eyja-fiarðar, ok lofaðe hónom hvárke at halda <anchor id=a149.1><pb id=pb149 n=149><note place=margin>[207: iii. 12.]</note>austr né vestr þaðan. Þá spurðe Hrólfr son hans, áðr firðenom lauk <anchor id=a149.2>upp, ef Þórr vísaðe hónom í Dums-haf<note place=apparatus id=an149.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Dums (not Dumbs-), H and S.</note> til vetr-vistar, hvárt hann <anchor id=a149.3>munde þat hafa eðr eige; þvi at skipverjom þótte mál or hafe es <anchor id=a149.4>á liðet vas miok sumaret<note place=apparatus id=an149.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þvi at ... sumaret]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=14.2><anchor id=a149.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Helge tók land fyr útan Hrísey, ok fyr innan Svarfaðar-dal.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a149.6>Hann vas enn fyrsta vettr á Hámundar-st&aolig;ðom. Þeir fengo vetr <anchor id=a149.7>mikinn, svá at við sialft vas, at kvik-fé þeirra m&oelig;nde deyja, þat es <anchor id=a149.8>þeir h&aolig;fðo. En um váret geck Helge upp á Sólar-fiall<note place=apparatus id=an149.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Sólar-fioll, S.</note>, ok sá, at <anchor id=a149.9>svartara vas inn at siá myklo til fiarðarens,&mdash;es þeir k&aolig;lloðo Eyja-fi&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a149.10>af eyjom þeim es þar l&aoacute;go úte fyrer<note place=apparatus id=an149.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es þeir ... úte fyrer]</ab> add. S.</note>&mdash;Bar hann þá<note place=apparatus id=an149.5><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá]</ab> þat, Cd.</note> á skip<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a149.11>allt es hann átte; en Hámundr bió efter<note place=apparatus id=an149.6><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en H. bió efter]</ab> add. S.</note>. Hann lende við Galtar-hamar. <anchor id=a149.12>Þar skaut hann svínom tveimr á land, gelte þeim es Solve <anchor id=a149.13>hét, ok gylto. Þau fundosk þremr<note place=apparatus id=an149.7><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> iii, Cd.</note> vetrom síðarr í Solva-dale, ok <anchor id=a149.14>vóro þá saman lxx svína. Þann vettr bió Helge at Bíldz-&aoacute;; en <anchor id=a149.15>um sumaret kannaðe hann hérað allt; ok nam Eyja-fi&aolig;rð allan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a149.16>miðle Siglo-ness ok Reynis-ness; ok g&oelig;rðe elld mikinn við hvern <anchor id=a149.17>vaz-ós við sió, ok helgaðe ser svá allan fi&aolig;rðenn nesja miðle.

<p n=14.3><anchor id=a149.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Einom vettre síðarr f&oelig;rðe Helge bú sítt í Crist-nes, ok bió <anchor id=a149.19>þar til dauða-dags<note place=apparatus id=an149.8><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> dax, vell.</note>.  Hann vas miok blandenn í trúnne: hann <anchor id=a149.20>trúðe á Crist ok kende því við hann bústað sínn<note place=apparatus id=an149.9><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok kende ... bústað sínn]</ab> add. S.</note>; en þó hét hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a149.21>á Þór til sæfara ok harðræða, ok allz þess er hónom þótte mesto <anchor id=a150.1><pb id=pb150 n=150><note place=margin>[222, 207: iii. 13,16.]</note>varða. Í bú-f&oeacute;rslo Helga varð Þórunn Hyrna léttare í Þórunnar-ey <anchor id=a150.2>í Eyja-fiarðar-ár-kvíslom, ok vas þá f&oeacute;dd Þórbi&aolig;rg Holma-sól.

<p n=14.3.1><anchor id=a150.3>Síðan skifte Helge lande með sonom sínom ok m&aoacute;gom.

<p n=14.4><anchor id=a150.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ingiallde syne sínom gaf hann upp frá Þver-&aoacute; enne ýtre, fyr <anchor id=a150.5>austan Eyia-fiarðar-&aoacute; til Arnar-hváls, hann bió á Þver-&aoacute; enne<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a150.6>&OElig;fre; ok reiste þar hof mikit. Hann átte Salgerðe, dóttor Steinólfs <anchor id=a150.7>ens Lága or Hrísey, Olvéss sonar Barna-karls: þeirra son vas <anchor id=a150.8>Eyjolfr, es átte Ástríðe Vígfúss dóttor af Vors, Víkinga-Kára <anchor id=a150.9>(sonar): syner (þeirra) Vígfúss, ok Víga-Glúmr, ok Þórsteinn. <anchor id=a150.10>Son Glúms vas Vígfúss, faðer Bergs, f&aolig;ðor Steinunnar, móðor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a150.11>Þórsteins Rangláz.

<p n=14.4.1><anchor id=a150.12>[S: Hann átte Salgerðe Steinólfs dóttor; þeirra son Eyjolfr, <anchor id=a150.13>faðer Víga-Glúms; ok Steinolfr, faðer Þórarens Ílla; ok Arnórs <anchor id=a150.14>ens Góða Rauðæings.]

<p n=14.4.2><anchor id=a150.15>Efter þat tóko menn at byggja í land-náme Helga at hans ráðe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=14.5><anchor id=a150.16><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Maðr hét Þórsteinn Svarfaðr, son Rauðs Ruggo í Naumo-dale<note place=apparatus id=an150.1><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>son ... Naumo-dale]</ab> add. S.</note>. <anchor id=a150.17>Hann átte Hilde, dóttor Þráins Svarta-þurs. Þórsteinn fór <anchor id=a150.18>til Íslannz, ok nam Svarfaðar-dal at ráðe Helga. B&aolig;rn hans vóro <anchor id=a150.19>þau, Karl enn Rauða, es bió at Karls-&aoacute;<note place=apparatus id=an150.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> S; Karsá, vell.</note>; ok Goðrún, es átte Hafþórr <anchor id=a150.20>víkingr: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau Klaufe ok Groa, es átte Gríss<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a150.21>Gledill.

<pb id=pb151 n=151><note place=margin>[208: iii. 13.]</note>

<p n=14.6><anchor id=a151.1><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Atle Illíngr hét maðr; hann drap Hafþór, en sette Karl enn <anchor id=a151.2>Rauða í iarn. Þá kom Klaufe á úvart, ok drap Atla, en tók Karl <anchor id=a151.3>or iarne. Klaufe átte Yngvilde Rauð-kinn, dóttor Ásgeirs Rauðfelldar, <anchor id=a151.4>systor þeirra Óláfs Volo-briótz ok Þórleifs Skáldz. Fyrer <anchor id=a151.5>þeim hió hann iamna-belg es þeir tóko í lande hans. Þá kvað<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a151.6>Þórleifr þetta:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a151.7>Belg hió fyr mer B&oelig;ggver iamna<note place=apparatus id=an151.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>iamna]</ab> emend.; snoggvan, Cd.</note>
    <l><anchor id=a151.8>En fyr Oláfe ál ok verjo:
    <l><anchor id=a151.9>Svá skal verða, &lsquo;ef ver lifom,&rsquo;
    <l><anchor id=a151.10>Við ...<note place=apparatus id=an151.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Við bol buen, Cd. (badly).</note> Boggver h&oelig;ggvenn.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
</lg>

<p n=14.6.1><anchor id=a151.11>Þar af g&oelig;rezk Svarfd&oeacute;la Saga.

<p n=14.7><anchor id=a151.12><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Karl hét maðr, es nam Str&aolig;nd alla út frá Ufsom til Mígande.

<p n=14.8><anchor id=a151.13><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Hámundr Heljar-skinn eignaðesk Galma<hi>ns</hi>-str&aolig;nd<note place=apparatus id=an151.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Galmans-]</ab> Gamla-, Cd.</note> alla ok á <anchor id=a151.14>miðle Svarfaðar-dals ok H&oelig;rg-ár-dals, ok bió þar sem Helge hafðe <anchor id=a151.15>fyrst buet, ok nú heiter síðan á Hámundar-st&aolig;ðom.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=14.9><anchor id=a151.16><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Hámundr gaf Erne frænda sínom, es numet hafðe Arnar-fi&aolig;rð <anchor id=a151.17>fyrr, (l&aolig;nd<note place=apparatus id=an151.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>l&aolig;nd]</ab> om. Cd.</note>) þau es vóro fyr útan Reistar-&aoacute;. Orn bió í <anchor id=a151.18>Arnar-nese; en Hámundr selðe Þórvalde þær iarðer allar es liggja <anchor id=a151.19>á miðle Reistar-ár ok Horgárdals-ár.&mdash;Við hann es Þórvallz-dalr <anchor id=a151.20>kendr; þar bió hann.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=14.10><anchor id=a151.21><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Helge enn Magre gaf þá Hámunde iarðer á miðle Merki-gils <anchor id=a152.1><pb id=pb152 n=152><note place=margin>[210: iii. 13.]</note>ok Skiálgs-dals-ár; ok bió hann á Espi-hóle. Þórer vas son <anchor id=a152.2>hans es þar bió, faðer Þórvallz Króks<note place=apparatus id=an152.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Krox, vell.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Cetils, f&aolig;ðor Einars, <anchor id=a152.3>f&aolig;ðor Þórsteins Ranglatz.

<p n=14.10.1><anchor id=a152.4>Þórunn hét dótter Arnar or Arnar-nese, es átte Ásgeirr Rauð&shy;felldr, <anchor id=a152.5>son Heriolfs, þess es nam Breið-dal. Ásgeirr vas bróðer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a152.6>Bodmods Gerpis, Grímolfs sonar af Ogðom. Móðer þeirra Ásgeirs <anchor id=a152.7>vas Hialmgerðr, syster þeirra Broz ok Boga. Narfe hét son Arnar <anchor id=a152.8>or Arnar-nese; hann átte Ulfeiðe Ingiallz-dóttor, Helga sonar ens <anchor id=a152.9>Magra.&mdash;Við hann ero Narfa-sker kend.&mdash;Þeirra son Ásbrandr, <anchor id=a152.10>faðer Hello-Narfa.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=14.11><anchor id=a152.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> [S: Hámundr Heljar-skinn, son Hiors konungs, miðlaðe <anchor id=a152.12>l&aolig;nd við Orn frænda sínn, þá es hann kom vestan&mdash;þann es numit <anchor id=a152.13>hafðe Arnar-fi&aolig;rð&mdash;ok bió hann í Arnar-nese: hans dótter vas <anchor id=a152.15>Iðunn, es átte Ásgeirr Rauðfelldr. Son Arnar vas Narfe es Narba-sker<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a152.16>ero við kend. Hann átte Ulfeiðe, dóttor Ingiallz or Gnúpo-felle. <anchor id=a152.17>Þeirra syner vóro þeir Ásbrandr, faðer Hello-Narba; ok <anchor id=a152.18>Eyjolfr, faðer Þórkels í Haga; ok Helge, faðer Gríms á Kalf-skinne.]

<p n=14.12><anchor id=a152.19><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Galman<note place=apparatus id=an152.2><ab type=lineNumRef><corr sic=19>20</corr>.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Galman]</ab> Galmr, S, here; but Galmans-strond below, both <anchor id=a152.20>H and S.</note> hét maðr, es nam Galmans str&aolig;nd, á miðle Þórvallz-dals-ár<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a152.21>ok Reistar-ár: hans son vas Ormr, faðer Þórvallz, <anchor id=a152.22>f&aolig;ðor Biarnar, f&aolig;ðor Þóroz, f&aolig;ðor Þórunnar, móðor Dýrfinno, <anchor id=a153.1><pb id=pb153 n=153><note place=margin>[211: iii. 14.]</note>móðor Þórsteins Smiðs, Skeggja sonar. [S: Hans son vas Þórvaldr, <anchor id=a153.2>f. Orms, f. Barna-Þóroddz, etc.]

<p n=14.13><anchor id=a153.3><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Þórvallde gaf Helge land miðle Reistar-ár ok Horg-ár; en <anchor id=a153.4>hann hafðe áðr buet í Þórvallz-dale.

<p n=14.14><anchor id=a153.5><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Geirleifr hét maðr, es nam Horgár-dal upp til Myrk-ár;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a153.6>hann vas Hrap<hi>p</hi>s son, ok bió í Haga-enom<note place=apparatus id=an153.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Haga&apos;num, S.</note> Forna: hans son vas <anchor id=a153.7>Bi&aolig;rn enn Auðge, es Auðbrecko-menn ero frá komner.

<p n=14.15><anchor id=a153.8><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Maðr hét Þórðr Slítande: hann nam Horgár-dal upp frá <anchor id=a153.9>Myrk-&aoacute;, ok ofan til Dranga &aolig;ðrom megin. Hans son vas Ornolfr, <anchor id=a153.10>es átte Yngvilde Allra-systor. Þeirra syner vóro þeir Þórðr, ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a153.11>Þórvarðr í Crist-nese; ok Steingrímr at Kroppe.

<p n=14.16><anchor id=a153.12><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> Þórðr Slítande gaf Þórgeire Skolm, frænda sínom, af land-náme <anchor id=a153.13>síno. Hans son vas Þóralfr<note place=apparatus id=an153.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Þórolfr, Cd.</note> enn Sterke, es bió at Myrk-&aoacute;.

<p n=14.17><anchor id=a153.14><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> Þórer Þursa-sprenger hét maðr; hann vas f&oeacute;ddr í Omð á <anchor id=a153.15>Háloga-lande. Hann varð land-fl&oeacute;mðr fyr Hákone iarle Griótgarz<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a153.16>syne, ok fór hann af því til Íslannz. Hann nam &OElig;xna-dal <anchor id=a153.17>allan, ok bió at Vaz-&aoacute;. Hans son vas Steinr&oelig;ðr enn Ramme, es <anchor id=a153.18>m&aolig;rgom manne vann bót þeim es illar vætter<note place=apparatus id=an153.3><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>illar vætter]</ab> emend.; aðrar vætter, H; aðrar mein vætter, S.</note> g&oelig;rðo mein.

<p n=14.18><anchor id=a153.19><ab type=parNum>18.</ab> Geirhildr hét fi&aolig;lkunnig kona ok mein-s&aolig;m<note place=apparatus id=an153.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mein-]</ab> S.</note>.  Þat s&aoacute; <anchor id=a153.20>ofresker menn, at Steinr&oelig;ðr kom at henne úvarre; en hon brá ser<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a154.1><pb id=pb154 n=154><note place=margin>[212: iii. 14.]</note>í nautz-belgs líke vatz-fullz. Steinr&oelig;ðr vas iarn-smiðr, ok hafðe <anchor id=a154.2>iarn-gadd í hende. Um fund þeirra es þetta kveðit:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a154.3>Fork lét æ sem orkar ...
</lg>

<p rend="noindent" n=14.18.1><anchor id=a154.4>Dótter Steinr&oelig;ðar vas Þórliót, es átte Þórvarðr í Crist-nese.

<p n=14.19><anchor id=a154.5><ab type=parNum>19.</ab> Auðolfr hét maðr; hann fór af Iaðre til Íslannz, ok nam<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a154.6>H&oelig;rgár-dal, niðr frá Þver-&aoacute; til Bægis-ár<note place=apparatus id=an154.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Bægis-]</ab> &lsquo;æ,&rsquo; not &lsquo;&oelig;,&rsquo; vell.</note>, ok bió at enne syðre <anchor id=a154.7>Bægis-&aoacute;. Hann átte Þórillde, dóttor Helga (ens) Magra. Þeirra <anchor id=a154.8>dótter Yngvilldr, es átte Þóroddr Hialmr, faðer Arnliótz, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a154.9>Halldórs, f&aolig;ðor Einars, f&aolig;ðor Iorunnar, móðor Hallz <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Gizurar, <anchor id=a154.10>f. Þorvallz, f. Gizurar iarls<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an154.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Einars ... iarls]</ab> om. S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=14.20><anchor id=a154.11><ab type=parNum>20.</ab> Eysteinn Radulfs son<note place=apparatus id=an154.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Randulfs s., S.</note>, &OElig;xna-Þóris sonar, nam land niðr frá <anchor id=a154.12>Bægis-&aoacute; til Kræklinga-hlíðar<note place=apparatus id=an154.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>til Krækl.-hl.]</ab> add. S.</note>; ok bió at Lóne: hans son vas <anchor id=a154.13>Gunnsteinn, es átte Hlíf, dóttor Heðins or Miolo. Þeirra b&aolig;rn <anchor id=a154.14>vóro þau Halldóra, es Víga-Glúmr átte; ok Þórgrímr; ok Grímr <anchor id=a154.15>Eyrar-leggr.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=14.21><anchor id=a154.16><ab type=parNum>21.</ab> Eyvindr Hane hét g&aolig;fogr maðr; hann kom út síð land-náma-tíðar<note place=apparatus id=an154.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann kom ... tíðar]</ab> add. S.</note>. <anchor id=a154.17>Hann átte skip við Þórgrím Hlífar son. Hann vas frænde <anchor id=a154.18>Ondotz sona. Þeir g&aoacute;fo hónom land; ok bió hann í Hana-túne; <anchor id=a154.19>ok vas hann kallaðr Tún-Hane&mdash;þar es nú kallað Mar-b&oeacute;le.&mdash;Hann <anchor id=a155.1><pb id=pb155 n=155><note place=margin>[213: iii. 15.]</note>átte Þórunne, dóttor Þórolfs &OElig;xna-Þóris sonar: hans son vas <anchor id=a155.2>Snorre Hlíðmanna-Goðe.


<p n=15.1><anchor id=a155.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> Ondóttr Kráka, sá es fyrr vas geteð, g&oelig;rðesk <anchor id=a155.4>ríkr maðr. En es Bi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an155.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>En es B.]</ab> repetition (but fuller) from ch. 13. 3.</note> mágr hans andaðesk, talðe <anchor id=a155.5>Grímr herser konung eiga at taka allt fé hans; þvi at hann vas<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a155.6>útlendr; en syner hans fyr vestan haf, Eyvindr Austmaðr, ok <anchor id=a155.7>Þróndr Miok-siglande. En Ondóttr gat halldet féino til handa <anchor id=a155.8>Þrónde systor-syne sínom. En es Þróndr frá andlát f&aolig;ðor síns, <anchor id=a155.9>siglðe hann er Suðr-eyjom þá sigleng, es hann vas Miok-siglande <anchor id=a155.10>af kallaðr, ok tók þá við f&aolig;ðor-erfð sínne; ok fór til Íslannz, sem<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a155.11>síðarr mun sagt verða.

<p n=15.2><anchor id=a155.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> B&oeacute;r Ondóttz stóð ner sió, ok skamt á meðal ok Ingiallz <anchor id=a155.13>b&oeacute;jar. Grímr bió skamt frá Ingiallde; hann fór at Ondótte um <anchor id=a155.14>nótt, es hann viðaðe í skóge til &aolig;l-hito lítlo fyre Iól, ok vá hann í <anchor id=a155.15>trauste konongs, ok þá fióra saman. Ena s&aolig;mo nótt bar Signý<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a155.16>á lang-skip allt lausa-fé Ondótz; ok fór með sono sína tvá, þá <anchor id=a155.17>Ásmund ok Ásgrím, ok alla húskarla sína, til Sigvatz f&aolig;ðor síns; <anchor id=a155.18>en sende sono sína til Heðins fóstra síns í Sókna-dal til fylsknis; <anchor id=a155.19>þvi at hon vette, at Grímr m&oelig;nde efter þeim leita. En hann kom <anchor id=a155.20>efter þeim með tvau skip fyr austan Líðandes-nes, ok rann-sakaðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a155.21>skip hennar, ok fann eige sveinana. Steinarr hét maðr, es sveinom <anchor id=a155.22>fylgðe til Heðins: þangat fór Grímr at leita þeirra. Þeir fundo <anchor id=a156.1><pb id=pb156 n=156><note place=margin>[215: iii. 15.]</note>Ornolf son Heðins í skóge; hann g&oelig;rðe ser órar, ok lét sem hann <anchor id=a156.2>felle í brotfall; þvi at hann vilde ecki segja. Þá fundo þeir annan <anchor id=a156.3>son Heðins es Ulfr hét, es geymðe feár f&aolig;ðor síns; hann tók halft <anchor id=a156.4>hundrað silfrs af Gríme at segja til sveinanna: hann f&oeacute;rðe f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a156.5>5 sínom féit, ok sagðe þetta; en kom ecki til Gríms. Eige treystesk <anchor id=a156.6>Grímr heim at s&oeacute;kja Héðin; þvi at hann grunaðe trúleik sveinsins: <anchor id=a156.7>ok fór hann heim; en sveinar vóro í iarð-húse til þess es <anchor id=a156.8>haust kom. Þá leyndosk þeir í braut, ok vildo til Sigvatz <anchor id=a156.9>móðor-f&aolig;ðor síns, ok urðo viller, á hvára h&aolig;nd þeim siór skylde <anchor id=a156.10>10 liggja; frost vas mikit á; en þeir skólauser. At b&oeacute; kómo þeir þá. <anchor id=a156.11>Ásmundr mælte, &lsquo;Kenner þú b&oeacute; þenna, bróðer.&rsquo; &lsquo;Eige,&rsquo; sagðe <anchor id=a156.12>Ásgrímr. Ok es þeir kómo at, kendo þeir svefn-skemmo þá, es <anchor id=a156.13>faðer þeirra hafðe g&oelig;ra látið. Þeir þóttosk þá illa komner; ok <anchor id=a156.14>sn&oelig;ro til Ingializ en<hi>s</hi> Tryggva. Þá vas Ióla aftan. Þeir dulðosk <anchor id=a156.15>15 þar. Gyða kende þá fyrst, ok minte Ingialld á vin-giæðe þeirra <anchor id=a156.16>Ondottz, ok bað þeim við-t&aolig;ko. Þar vóro þeir þann vetr; ok <anchor id=a156.17>h&aolig;fðo eige n&aolig;fn sín.

<p n=15.2.1><anchor id=a156.18>En um sumaret efter g&oelig;rðe Grímr veizlo mót Auðunne, iarle <anchor id=a156.19>Harallz konungs. En þá nótt es hann hafðe veret at &aolig;l-hito<note place=apparatus id=an156.1><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> -heito, vell.</note>, þá <anchor id=a156.20>20 brendo syner Ondottz hann inne. Síðan tóko þeir bát Ingiallz ok <anchor id=a156.21>r&oelig;ro braut til eyjar es liggr á Hvine. Þeir s&aolig;gðo áðr Gyðo <anchor id=a156.22>ok Ingiallde hvat í vas orðet. Hann bað þá verða í brauto, ok <anchor id=a157.1><pb id=pb157 n=157><note place=margin>[216: iii. 15.]</note>koma alldrí í augsýn ser. <hi>Síðan r&oelig;ro þeir til eyarinnar.</hi><note place=apparatus id=an157.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Síðan r. þ. t. e.]</ab> added by conjecture; some such passage is missing.</note> Þeir setto <anchor id=a157.2>upp bát sínn, ok gengo til húss. Þeir heyrðo manna tal í húsonom<note place=apparatus id=an157.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> transposed and emend.; þeir h. m. tal í husonom; at þeir hefði vereð um nóttena í ferð með A. iarle, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a157.3>um nóttena, at þar h&aoacute;fðo veret í ferð með Auðunne iarle. Þeir <anchor id=a157.4>gengo til bátzens, es þeir h&aolig;fðo þetta heyrt, ok r&oelig;ro til lannz. <anchor id=a157.5>Þeir s&aoacute; hvar flaut sneckja iarlsens ti&aolig;lldoð. Þeir gengo til þess<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a157.6>herbyrgis es þeim vas sagt at iarlenn svaf í; en hans menn vóro á <anchor id=a157.7>skipe; en tveir menn héldo v&aolig;rð yfer iarlenom. Ásmundr greip <anchor id=a157.8>þá báða, ok hélt þeim. Ásgrímr geck at iarlenom, ok sette spiótz-odd <anchor id=a157.9>sínn fyr brióst iarlenom; ok bað hann reiða ser f&aolig;ðor-gi&aolig;ld. <anchor id=a157.10>Þá selðe iarl fram goll-hringa þriá, ok goðvefjar skickjo; en Ásgrímr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a157.11>gaf hónom namn, ok kallaðe hann Auðun Geit. Ondótz <anchor id=a157.12>syner hliópo til bátzens ok r&oelig;ro út efter firðenom; ok í r&aolig;st es <anchor id=a157.13>vas á firðenom, ok breiddo þar á sióenn skickjona, fyrir (því) at <anchor id=a157.14>þeir s&aoacute; at iarls-menn r&oelig;ro efter þeim, ok mondo þeir eige undan <anchor id=a157.15>komask. Þeir iarls-menn fundo skickjona, ok hugðo þá mundo<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a157.16>vesa drucknaða.

<p n=15.2.2><anchor id=a157.17>En Ondoz syner fóro í Súrna-dal, norðr um Stim, til Eiriks <anchor id=a157.18>Olfus lennz mannz; þar bió Hallsteinn Hestr annarr lendr maðr. <anchor id=a157.19>Þeir &aoacute;tto Ióla-dryckjo, ok veitte Eirikr vel fýrre; en Hallsteinn <anchor id=a157.20>laust Eirik með horne þá es þeir vóro at hans. En (es) Eirikr vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a157.21>heim farenn, en Hallsteinn sat efter, þá kom Ásgrímr einn inn, ok <anchor id=a158.1><pb id=pb158 n=158><note place=margin>[217: iii. 15.]</note>veitte Hallsteine mikit sár; ok hlióp út síðan ok til skógar; en <anchor id=a158.2>þeir efter hónom. Ásgrímr lagðesk á sund á &aoacute; í froste; en húskarlar <anchor id=a158.3>Hallsteins særðo hann miok með skotom. Hann komsk til <anchor id=a158.4>kerlingar einnar í skóge; hon skar kalf sínn, ok lagðe garnar <anchor id=a158.5>kalfsens hiá Ásgríme. Svá þótte þeim es inn kómo sem hans iðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a158.6>læge þar, en hann være dauðr. Þeir fóro heim, en kerling gr&oeacute;dde <anchor id=a158.7>hann á laun í iarð-húse.

<p n=15.3><anchor id=a158.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þat sumar fór Ásmundr til Íslannz, ok hugðe Ásgrím bróðor <anchor id=a158.9>sínn dauðan. Þá gaf Helge enn Magre hónom land at nema í <anchor id=a158.10>Kræklinga-hlíð.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=15.3.1><anchor id=a158.11>Þá fór út með hónom B&aolig;ðolfr or Hvine; hans son vas Skegge, <anchor id=a158.12>ok Þórer Keilis-múle. Síðarr átte B&aolig;ðolfr Þórbi&aolig;rgo Holma-sól; <anchor id=a158.13>þeirra dótter vas Þórgerðr es Ásmundr átte Ondótz son.

<p n=15.4><anchor id=a158.14><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hallsteinn dó et sama vár or s&aoacute;rom. Þá gaf Eirikr Olfus <anchor id=a158.15>Ásgríme lang-skip þrí-t&oelig;gt<note place=apparatus id=an158.1><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> xxx, vell.</note> at rúma-tale, ok héllt hann því í hernað;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a158.16>ok hafðe þá iðn nockor sumor. Haralldr konongr sette Þórgeir, <anchor id=a158.17>systor-son Gríms, til h&aolig;fuðs Ásgríme, ok feck hónom her-skip <anchor id=a158.18>tvau: hann fann hann alldrí. Þá fór hann til Íslannz, ok ætlaðe <anchor id=a158.19>at drepa Ásmund; ok kom á Eyrar, ok vas í Hvinverja-dale um <anchor id=a158.20>vettrenn. Þat sumar efter kom Ásgrímr út á Eyrom, ok átte skip<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a158.21>halft við Þóre Keilis-múla, ok vóro fiórer menn ok tottogo á. Þeir <anchor id=a158.22>vóro ósamþycker, ok leyste Ásgrímr skip til sín. Þórer reið norðr <anchor id=a159.1><pb id=pb159 n=159><note place=margin>[218: iii. 15.]</note>með halfa skipverja, ok kom í Hvinverja-dal, ok sagðe til fara <anchor id=a159.2>Ásgríms, ok reið heim síðan. Ásgrímr reið h&aolig;lfom mánaðe síðarr <anchor id=a159.3>frá skipe; ok giste at Þróndar Miok-siglanda, í Þróndar-holt; hann <anchor id=a159.4>bauð hónom vetr-vist, ok kvað hónom eige mundo óh&oelig;tt vesa <anchor id=a159.5>norðr at ríða fyr Þórgeire. Ásgrímr fór þó norðr með tolfta mann,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a159.6>ok h&aolig;fðo tolf hesta klyfjaða ok toskor á. Þann dag es þeir riðo <anchor id=a159.7>um Ki&aolig;l, bað hann þá í brynjom ríða, ok hafa cofla yfer útan; <anchor id=a159.8>ok segja, ef þeir Þórgeirr fyndesk, at Þórer Keilis-múle f&oeacute;re þar, en <anchor id=a159.9>Ásgrímr være norðr farenn. Þeir vóro þar tvær nætr at Þórgeirs; <anchor id=a159.10>þvi at hann hugðe þá Þóre vesa. Hann hafðe fyrer þriá tego<note place=apparatus id=an159.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> xxx, vell.</note><ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a159.11>manna. Hann reið á g&aolig;to með þeim, ok sofnaðe es hann kom <anchor id=a159.12>heim, ok dreymðe, at kona k&oeacute;me at hónom, ok segðe hónom, <anchor id=a159.13>hverer gester með hónom h&aolig;fðo veret. Síðan riðo þeir efter Ásgríme. <anchor id=a159.14>Þeir Ásgrímr<note place=apparatus id=an159.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ásgríme]</ab> emend.; epter á, Cd.</note> biðo á Vekels-hauge enom syðra, ok þar kom <anchor id=a159.15>Ásmundr bróðer hans til móz við hann með fióra tigo<note place=apparatus id=an159.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> xl, vell.</note> manna;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a159.16>hann sætte þá Þórgeirr.

<p n=15.5><anchor id=a159.17><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> F&aoacute;m vetrom síðarr fór Ásgrímr útan, ok feck Geirríðar<note place=apparatus id=an159.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Geirhilde, S.</note>, <anchor id=a159.18>Eiriks dóttor Olfuss. Þeirra son vas Elliða-Grímr. Þau fóro síðan <anchor id=a159.19>til Íslannz, ok gaf Helge enn Magre Ásgríme land-nám í Kræklinga-hlíð; <anchor id=a159.20>ok &aoacute;tto þeir br&oeacute;ðr alla hlíðena&mdash;ok vas af því k&aolig;lloð<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a159.21>Kræklinga-hlíð, at þeir vóro syner Ondotz Kr&aoacute;ko.&mdash;Ásmundr bió <anchor id=a159.22>at Gler-&aoacute; enne syðre; en Ásgrímr at enne n&oelig;rðre. Son Ásgríms <anchor id=a160.1><pb id=pb160 n=160><note place=margin>[219: iii. 16.]</note>vas Elliða-Grímr, f&aolig;ðor Ásgríms, f&aolig;ðor Sigfúss, f&aolig;ðor Þórgerðar, <anchor id=a160.2>móðor Gríms, f&aolig;ðor Svertings.

<p n=15.6><anchor id=a160.3><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an160.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> § 6 is probably a repetition of ch. 14. 10.</note>Helge enn Magre gaf Hámunde máge sínom i&aolig;rð á miðle <anchor id=a160.4>Merki-gils ok Skiálgs-dals-ár; ok bió (hann) á Espi-hóle enom <anchor id=a160.5>syðra. Hans son vas Þórer es þar bió; hann átte Þórdíse Caðals-dóttor:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a160.6>þeirra son Þórarenn á Espi-hóle enom n&oelig;rðra; ok Þór-vallðr <anchor id=a160.7>Krókr á Grund;&mdash;en Þórgrímr í M&aolig;ðro-felle vas eige hennar <anchor id=a160.8>son<note place=apparatus id=an160.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas e. h. son]</ab> add. S.</note>,&mdash;ok Vígdís dótter<note place=apparatus id=an160.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dótter]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=15.7><anchor id=a160.9><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Helge gaf Þóro dóttor sína Gunnare syne Ulfliótz, es l&aolig;g <anchor id=a160.10>hafðe út; ok land upp<note place=apparatus id=an160.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>upp]</ab> út, S.  Skialx-, vell.</note> frá Skiálgs-dals-&aoacute; til Hals. Hann bió í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a160.11>Diúpa-dale: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau Þórsteinn, Ketill<note place=apparatus id=an160.5><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ketill]</ab> add. S.</note> ok Steinolfr<note place=apparatus id=an160.6><ab type=textRef>Steinolfr]</ab> Steinmóðr, S.</note>, <anchor id=a160.12>ok Yngvilldr, ok Þórlaug<note place=apparatus id=an160.7><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> ok [Þórlaug] add. S.</note>.

<p n=15.8><anchor id=a160.13><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Helgi gaf Auðunne Rotin<note place=apparatus id=an160.8><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Rotin]</ab> H and S.</note>, syni Þórolfs Smiors, Þórsteins <anchor id=a160.14>sonar Skrofa, Gríms sonar Cambans, Helgo dóttor sína, ok land <anchor id=a160.15>upp frá Halse til Villinga-dals. Hann bió í Saurb&oeacute;, þeirra b&aolig;rn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a160.16>(vóro þau) Einarr, faðer Eyjolfs, f&aolig;ðor Goðmundar ens Rík<hi>j</hi>a; ok <anchor id=a160.17>Vígdís, móðer Halla ens Hvíta, f&aolig;ðor Orms, f&aolig;ðor Gellis, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a160.18>Orms, f&aolig;ðor Halla <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Þorgeirs, f. Þorvarz, f. Ara, f. Guðmundar <anchor id=a160.19>byscops<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=15.9><anchor id=a160.20><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Hámundr Heljar-skinn feck Helgo Helga-dóttor efter andlát<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a160.21>Ingunnar systor hennar; ok vas þeirra dótter Yngvildr Allra-syster, <anchor id=a160.22>es Ornolfr átte.

<pb id=pb161 n=161><note place=margin>[221, 223: iii. 17.]</note>

<p n=15.10><anchor id=a161.1><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Helge gaf Hrólfe syne sínom &aolig;ll l&aolig;nd fyr austan Eyja-fiarðar-&aoacute; <anchor id=a161.2>frá Hvále<note place=apparatus id=an161.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Arnar-hvále, S.</note> upp, ok bió hann í Gnúpo-felle, ok reiste þar <anchor id=a161.3>hof miket. Hann átte Þórorno, dóttor Þróndar Mióbeins: þeirra <anchor id=a161.4>b&aolig;rn vóro þau Hafliðe enn Orve, ok Valþiófr, Viðarr, ok Grane, <anchor id=a161.5>B&aolig;ðvarr, ok Ingialldr, Eyvindr; Goðlaug es Þórkell enn Svarte<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a161.6>átte. Valþiófr vas faðer Helga, f&aolig;ðor Þóris, f&aolig;ðor Arnórs, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a161.7>Þóríðar.

<p n=15.11><anchor id=a161.8><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Helge gaf Hlíf, dóttor sína, Þórgeire syne Þórðar Bialca; ok <anchor id=a161.9>land út frá Þver-&aoacute; til Varð-giár. Þau bioggo at Fiske-l&oeacute;k. B&aolig;rn <anchor id=a161.10>þeirra vóro þau Þórðr ok Helga.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=15.12><anchor id=a161.11><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Skage Skofta son hét maðr ágætr á M&oeacute;re; hann varð <anchor id=a161.12>úsáttr við Eystein Glumro, ok fór af því til Íslannz. Hann nam <anchor id=a161.13>at ráðe Helga Eyja-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd ena n&oelig;rðre<note place=apparatus id=an161.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>n&oelig;rðre]</ab> Eystre, S.</note> út frá Varð-gi&aoacute; til <anchor id=a161.14>Fnióska-dals-ár<note place=apparatus id=an161.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Fliokna-, vell.</note>, ok bió í Siglo-vík. Hans son vas Þórbi&aolig;rn, faðer <anchor id=a161.15>Heðins ens Milda, es Svalbarð lét g&oelig;ra sextán vettrom fyrer<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a161.16>Cristne; hann átte Ragneiðe, dóttor Eyjolfs Valgerðar sonar.


<p n=16.1><anchor id=a161.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórer</hi> Snepill hét maðr, son Ketils Brimils, Ornolfs <anchor id=a161.18>sonar, Bi&aolig;rnolfs sonar, Gríms sonar Loðin-kinna. <anchor id=a161.19>Ketill Brimill átte Iórunne, dóttor Þórgnýs<note place=apparatus id=an161.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> Þorgnyns, vell.</note> L&aolig;gmannz af Svia-ríke. <anchor id=a161.20>Ketill Brimill vas víkingr mikill. Hann fór til Hialt-lannz með<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a161.21>Torf-Einare. En es hann biósk til Íslannz, hét Gautr skipvere <anchor id=a162.1><pb id=pb162 n=162><note place=margin>[223: iii. 17.]</note>hans. En es þeir l&aoacute;go til hafs, kómo at þeim víkingar, ok vildo <anchor id=a162.2>ræna þá; en Gautr laust skipverja<note place=apparatus id=an162.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>skipverja]</ab> stafn-bua, S.</note> þeirra með hialmon-vele til <anchor id=a162.3>bana. Við þat l&aolig;gðo víki(ngar frá)<note place=apparatus id=an162.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>(  )]</ab> hole in the vell.</note>. Síðan vas hann kallaðr <anchor id=a162.4>Hialmon-Gautr. Þeir Þórer fóro til Íslannz, ok kómo skipe síno <anchor id=a162.5>í<note place=apparatus id=an162.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>skipe síno í]</ab> S; á, vell.</note> Skiálfanda-fliótz-ós. Þórer nam Kallda-kinn, miðle Skugga-biarga<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a162.6>ok Liósa-vaz-skarz. Hann nam þar eige ynðe, ok fór á <anchor id=a162.7>braut. Þá kvað hann þetta<corr>:</corr>&mdash;

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a162.8>Her liggr <hi>kióla keyrer</hi> Kalda kinn <hi>um aldr</hi>:
    <l><anchor id=a162.9>En ver forom heiler Hialmun-Gautr <hi>á braut</hi>.
</lg>

<p n=16.1.1><anchor id=a162.10>Síðan nam hann Hnióska-dal<note place=apparatus id=an162.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Hniosk-, H and N.</note> allan til Ódeilo, ok bió at Lunde.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a162.11>Hann blótaðe lundenn. Ormr Tosco-bak vas son Snepils, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a162.12>Hlenna ens Gamla; ok Þórkell Svarte í Hleiðrar-garðe: hann átte <anchor id=a162.13>Goðlaugo Hrólfs dóttor: þeirra son Ongull enn Svarte; ok Rafn, <anchor id=a162.14>faðer Þórðar at Stocka-hl&aolig;ðum<note place=apparatus id=an162.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> S; -loðu, vell.</note>, ok Goðríðr es átte Þorgeirr Goðe <anchor id=a162.15>at Liósa-vatne.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=16.2><anchor id=a162.16><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þengill Miok-siglande fór af Háloga-lande til Íslannz. Hann <anchor id=a162.17>nam land at ráðe Helga út frá Hniósk-&aoacute; til Grene-víkr; ok bió at <anchor id=a162.18>H&aolig;fða. Hans syner vóro þeir Vermundr, faðer Ásolfs í H&aolig;fða; <anchor id=a162.19>ok Hallsteinn, es þetta kvað, es hann siglðe af hafe, es hann frá <anchor id=a162.20>andlát f&aolig;ðor síns:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb163 n=163><note place=margin>[225: iii. 18.]</note>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a163.1>Drúper H&aolig;fðe, dauðr es Þengill:
    <l><anchor id=a163.2>Hlæja hlíðer við Hallsteine.
</lg>

<p n=16.3><anchor id=a163.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórmóðr hét maðr, es nam Grene-vík, ok Hval-látr, ok Str&aolig;nd <anchor id=a163.4>alla út til Þórgeirs-fiarðar. Hans son vas Snortr<note place=apparatus id=an163.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Snortr]</ab> S; Snorre, H (badly).</note>, es Snertlingar <anchor id=a163.5>ero frá komner.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=16.4><anchor id=a163.6><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórgeirr hét maðr, es nam Þórgeirs-fi&aolig;rð, ok Hvalvaz-fi&aolig;rð.

<p n=16.5><anchor id=a163.7><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Loðinn Ongull hét maðr; hann vas f&oeacute;ddr í Ongle<note place=apparatus id=an163.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Ongley, S.</note> á Háloga-lande. <anchor id=a163.8>Hann fór fyre ofríke Hákonar iarls Griótgarz sonar til <anchor id=a163.9>Íslannz.&mdash;Í Ongle hafðe buet Sigarr konungr á Steig, ok þar<note place=apparatus id=an163.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> þar bió Nichulas Sigurðar son, add. M&ast; (died 1176).</note> <anchor id=a163.10>es Signýjar-bruðr ok Hagbarz-holmr.&mdash;Loðinn Ongull dó í hafe;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a163.11>en Eyvindr son hans<note place=apparatus id=an163.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Loðinn O. ... son hans]</ab> S; Islannz ok dó í hafe, H.</note> nam Flateyjar-dal upp til Gunnsteina ok blótaðe <anchor id=a163.12>þá. Þar liggr Ódeila á miðle land-náms þeirra Þóris Snepils. <anchor id=a163.13>Ásbi&aolig;rn Detti-áss<note place=apparatus id=an163.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> D&oelig;tti-, Cd.</note> vas son Eyvindar, faðer Finnboga ens Ramma.


<p n=17.1><anchor id=a163.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bárðr</hi>, sonr Heyjangs-Biarnar, kom skipe síno í <anchor id=a163.15>Skiálfanda fliótz-ós, ok nam Bárðar-dal allan upp<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a163.16>frá Kalfborgar-&aoacute;<note place=apparatus id=an163.6><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Kalborg-, S. breckum, S.</note>, ok Eyja-dals-&aoacute;, ok bió at Lundar-brecko um <anchor id=a163.17>hríð. Þá markaðe hann, at betre vóro land-viðre an haf-viðre; <anchor id=a163.18>ok hann ætlaðe af því<note place=apparatus id=an163.7><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>af þvi]</ab> add. S.</note> betre lannz kost fyr sunnan heiðar<note place=apparatus id=an163.8><ab type=textRef>heiðar]</ab> heiðe, S.</note>. Hann <anchor id=a163.19>sende sono sína suðr um G&oelig;<note place=apparatus id=an163.9><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>G&oelig;-]</ab> G&oeacute;, vell.</note>. Þá fundo þeir G&oelig;-beytla, ok <anchor id=a163.20>annan gróðr. En annat vár efter g&oelig;rðe Bárðr kialka hverjo<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a164.1><pb id=pb164 n=164><note place=margin>[226: iii. 18.]</note>kykvende<note place=apparatus id=an164.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>S; kvikvende, vell. gegnt]</ab> (i.e. gengt), vell. and S. feallut, vell.</note> því es gegnt vas, ok lét draga sítt fóðr ok feár-hlut. <anchor id=a164.2>Hann fór Bárðar-g&aolig;to um Vánar-skarð; ok nam síðan Fliótz-hverfe; <anchor id=a164.3>ok bió at Gnúpom. Hann vas kallaðr Gnúpa-Bárðr.

<p n=17.2><anchor id=a164.4><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hans son vas Sigmundr, faðer Þórsteins, es átte Æso, dóttor <anchor id=a164.5>Hrólfs Rauð-skeggs: þeirra dótter Þórunn, es átte Þórkell Leifr,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a164.6>ok vas þeirra son Þórgeirr Goðe<note place=apparatus id=an164.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Goðe]</ab> add. S.</note> at Liósa-vatne.

<p><anchor id=a164.7>Annarr son Bárðar vas Þórsteinn, faðer Þóriss es vas á Fitjom <anchor id=a164.8>með Hákone konunge, ok skar rauf á oxa-húð, ok hafðe þá hlíf&mdash;því <anchor id=a164.9>vas hann kallaðr Leðr-hals.&mdash;Hann átte Fiorleifo<note place=apparatus id=an164.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Fiorleifo]</ab> S and Reykd. Saga; Freyleyfu, vell., but Fiorleif below.</note>, Eyvindar <anchor id=a164.10>dóttor: þeirra syner vóro þeir Hávarðr í Fellz-múla; ok Heriolfr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a164.11>at Mý-vatne; ok Ketill í Húsa-vík; ok Vemundr Kogor<note place=apparatus id=an164.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> kogr, vell.; kavgur, S.</note>, es átte <anchor id=a164.12>Halldóro, dóttor Þórkels Svarta; ok Áskell; ok Hals, es bió at <anchor id=a164.13>Helga-st&aolig;ðom.

<p n=17.3><anchor id=a164.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an164.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> This § is taken from M&ast;.</note>Campa-Grímr fór or Suðreyjom til Íslannz; ok velkte þá úte <anchor id=a164.15>allt sumar; ok braut skip sítt við Skialfanda-fliótz-ós. Hann nam<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a164.16>Kalda-kinn í annat sinn, ok selde ymsom m&aolig;nnom síðan: hans <anchor id=a164.17>dótter vas Arnbi&aolig;rg, es Ásolfr í H&aolig;fða átte.

<p n=17.4><anchor id=a164.18><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórfiðr Máne, son Áskels Tiorfa<note place=apparatus id=an164.6><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Torfa, S.</note>; hann nam land fyr neðan <anchor id=a164.19>Eyjadals-&aoacute; til Landa-mótz, ok um<note place=apparatus id=an164.7><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> sumt um, S (sic).</note> Liósa-vatz-skarð; ok bió at <anchor id=a164.20>&OElig;xar-&aoacute;.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb165 n=165><note place=margin>[227: iii. 19.]</note>


<p n=18.1><anchor id=a165.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 1.</ab> Þórer, son Gríms Gráfeldar-múla af Roga-lande, <anchor id=a165.2>hann nam Liósa-vaz-skarð<note place=apparatus id=an165.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórer ... skarð]</ab> S; om. H (a homoiotel.).</note>. Hans son vas Þórkell <anchor id=a165.3>Leifr enn Háve, faðer Þórgeirs Goða. Þórgeirr átte fyrr<note place=apparatus id=an165.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fyrr]</ab> fyrst, S.</note> Goðríðe, <anchor id=a165.4>dóttor Þórkels Svarta. Þeirra syner vóro<note place=apparatus id=an165.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>syner vóro]</ab> S; son var, vell.</note>; Þórkell Hákr, ok H&aolig;s-coldr, <anchor id=a165.5>Tiorve ok Collgrímr, Þórsteinn, ok Þórvarðr; en dótter<note place=apparatus id=an165.4><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Kolgrímr, S. en dótter]</ab> S; ok, vell.</note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a165.6>Sigríðr. Síðan átte hann Salgerðe<note place=apparatus id=an165.5><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Alfgerðe, S.</note>, dóttor Arngeirs ens Austr&oeacute;na. <anchor id=a165.7>Hann átte ok Þórk&aolig;tlo, Dala-Collz dóttor. Syner hans ok þeirra <anchor id=a165.8>kvenna vóro, Þórgrímr, Óttarr, Þórgils. Þesser vóro laun-getner, <anchor id=a165.9>Þórgrímr, ok Finne enn Draum-spake; hans móðer hét Lækny<note place=apparatus id=an165.6><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Lecny, S.</note> <anchor id=a165.10>út-lend.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=18.2><anchor id=a165.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Heðinn ok Hosculldr, syner Þórsteins Þurs fóro til Íslannz, <anchor id=a165.12>ok<note place=apparatus id=an165.7><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fóro ... ok]</ab> add. S.</note> n&aoacute;mo land fyr ofan<note place=apparatus id=an165.8><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ofan]</ab> innan, S.</note> Tungo-heiðe. Heðinn bió at Heðins-h&aolig;fða<note place=apparatus id=an165.9><ab type=textRef>heiðe]</ab> add. S.</note>, <anchor id=a165.13>ok átte Goðrúno. Þeirra dótter Arnríðr, es Ketill Fior-leifar <anchor id=a165.14>son átte; en Goðrún vas dótter þeirra es Hrólfr átte í <anchor id=a165.15>Gnúpo-felle. Hosculldr nam l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll fyr austan Lax-&aoacute;, ok bió<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a165.16>í Sk&aolig;rðo-vík<note place=apparatus id=an165.10><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-vík]</ab> om. H.</note>&mdash;við hann es kennt Hoscullz-vatn, þvi at hann <anchor id=a165.17>drucknaðe þar. Í þeirra land-náme es Húsa-vík, es Garðarr átte <anchor id=a165.18>vetr-seto. Son Hoscullz vas Hróalldr, es átte Ægileifo, dóttor <anchor id=a165.19>Hrólfs, Helga sonar ens Magra.

<p n=18.3><anchor id=a165.20><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Vestmarr ok Ulfr fóstbr&oeacute;ðr fóro á<note place=apparatus id=an165.11><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á]</ab> om. S.</note> eino skipe til Íslannz, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a165.21>n&aoacute;mo Reykjar-dal<note place=apparatus id=an165.12><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Reykja-, S.</note> allan fyr vestan Lax-&aoacute;, upp til Vestmars-vatz<note place=apparatus id=an165.13>Vestm&acomb;z, and Vestm&rcomb;, vell.</note>. <anchor id=a166.1><pb id=pb166 n=166><note place=margin>[228: iii. 19.]</note>Vestmarr átte Goðlaugo. Ulfr bió under Skratta-felle<note place=apparatus id=an166.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Skratta-felle]</ab> Hann átte (blank); þeirra son, etc., S.</note>; hans son <anchor id=a166.2>vas Geirolfr, es átte Vígdíse, Conals dóttor, síðarr an Þórgrímr: <anchor id=a166.3>þeirra son vas Hallr.


<p n=19.1><anchor id=a166.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>19.</hi> 1.</ab> Þórsteinn Hofðe hét maðr; hann vas herser á <anchor id=a166.5>H&aolig;rða-lande: hans syner vóro þeir Eyvindr ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a166.6>Ketill H&aolig;rzke. Eyvindr fýstesk til Íslannz, efter andlát f&aolig;ðor síns: <anchor id=a166.7>en Ketill bað hann nema b&aoacute;ðom þeim land ef honom sýndesk <anchor id=a166.8>síðarr at fara. Ketill kom í Húsa-vík skipe síno<note place=apparatus id=an166.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fýstesk ... skipe síno]</ab> S; Eyv. fór til Islanz ok nam, H.</note> ok nam Reykja-dal <anchor id=a166.9>upp frá Vestmars-vatne, ok bió á Helga-st&aolig;ðom&mdash;ok es þar <anchor id=a166.10>haugr hans. Hans son vas Áskell, es bana-sár feck við Eyja-fiarðar-&aoacute;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a166.11>gegnt Kroppe, þá es Steingrímr vilde hefna sauðar-h&aolig;fuðs-h&oelig;ggs. <anchor id=a166.12>Áskell átte dóttor Grenjaðar: þeirra son Víga-Scúta. <anchor id=a166.13>Fiorleif hét dótter Eyvindar es Þórer Leðr-hals átte.

<p n=19.2><anchor id=a166.14><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Náttfare, es með Garðare hafðe út faret, eignaðe ser áðr <anchor id=a166.15>Reykja-dal; ok hafðe merkt á viðom; en Eyvindr rak hann braut;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a166.16>ok lét hann hafa Náttfara-vík<note place=apparatus id=an166.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok lét ... -vík]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=19.3><anchor id=a166.17><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ketill, bróðer hans, bió á Einars-st&aolig;ðom: hans son vas <anchor id=a166.18>Conall, es átte Oddnýjo, Einars dóttor, systor Eyjolfs, Valgerðar <anchor id=a166.19>sonar: þeirra son Einarr. Þórðr vas annarr son Conals; hann <anchor id=a166.20>vas faðer Socka á Breiða-mýre, f&aolig;ðor Conals.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=19.4><anchor id=a166.21><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> [S: Ketill fór út at orð-sendingo Eyvindar; hann bió á Einars-st&aolig;ðom: <anchor id=a167.1><pb id=pb167 n=167><note place=margin>[230: iii. 19.]</note>hans son vas Conall, (ok) Þórsteinn, faðer Einars, es þar <anchor id=a167.2>bió síðan. Sonr Eyvindar vas Áskell Goðe, es átte dóttor Gren-gaðar: <anchor id=a167.3>þeirra syner Þórsteinn ok Víga-Scúta. Dótter Eyvindar <anchor id=a167.4>vas Fiorleif. Conall átte Oddnýjo, Einars dóttor, systor Eyjolfs <anchor id=a167.5>Valgerðar sonar: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau Einarr, es átte sex sono,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a167.6>ok dóttor Þóreyjo, es átte Steinolfr Márs son; ok &aolig;nnor Eydís, es <anchor id=a167.7>Þórsteinn Goðe átte or Ásbiarnar-vík. Þórðr Conals son vas faðer <anchor id=a167.8>Socka á Breiða-mýre, f&aolig;ðor Conals. Dótter Conals vas Vígdís, <anchor id=a167.9>es átte Þórgrímr, son Þórbiarnar Skaga; ok vas þeirra son Þórleifr <anchor id=a167.10>Geirolfs-stiúpr.]<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=19.5><anchor id=a167.11><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Grenjaðr hét maðr, Hrapps son, bróðer Geirleifs: hann nam <anchor id=a167.12>Þegjanda-dal, ok Krauna-heiðe<note place=apparatus id=an167.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> Hrauna-, vell.; Kra&vmacr;a-, S.</note>, Þórgerðar-fell, ok Lax-ár-dal neðan; <anchor id=a167.13>hann bió á Grenjaðar-st&aolig;ðom. Hann átte Þórgerðe, dóttor <anchor id=a167.14>Helga Hestz: þeirra son vas Þórgils Vá-múle, faðer Onundar <anchor id=a167.15><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Hallbero, m. Þórgerðar, m. Hallz ábóta, ok Hallbero es Reinn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a167.16>Styrmis son átte<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.


<p n=20.1><anchor id=a167.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>20.</hi> 1.</ab> Boðolfr<note place=apparatus id=an167.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>S; Guðolfr, vell. Gríms]</ab> Orms, S (better?).</note> hét maðr, son Gríms Grimolfs sonar af <anchor id=a167.18>Ogðom, bróðer B&aolig;ðmóðs.  Hann átte Þórunne, <anchor id=a167.19>dóttor Þióðolfs<note place=apparatus id=an167.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þióðolfs]</ab> emend.; Þorolfs, vell, and S.</note> ens Fróða: þeirra son vas Skegge. Þau fóro til <anchor id=a167.20>Íslannz ok bruto skip sítt við Tiornes, ok vóro at Bodolfs-kytjo<note place=apparatus id=an167.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Boðolfs skytiu, vell.; Auðolfs st&aolig;ðum, S (badly).</note><ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a167.21>enn fyrsta vetr. Hann nam Tiornes allt á miðle Tungo-ár ok <anchor id=a168.1><pb id=pb168 n=168><note place=margin>[231: iii. 20.]</note>Óss. B&aolig;ðolfr feck síðan Þórbi&aolig;rgo Holma-sól, dóttor Helga. <anchor id=a168.2>(Þeirra) dótter vas Þórgerðr, es átte Ásmundr Ondotz son: þeirra <anchor id=a168.3>son Þórleifr, faðer Þóríðar, es átte Valla-Liótr.

<p n=20.2><anchor id=a168.4><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Skegge B&aolig;ðolfs son nam Keldu-hverfe upp til Keldo-ness, ok <anchor id=a168.5>bió í Mikla-garðe: hann átte Helgo, dóttor Þórgeirs at Fiski-l&oeacute;k:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a168.6>þeirra son vas Þórer, farmaðr mikill; hann lét g&oelig;ra kn&aolig;rr í Sogne&mdash;þann <anchor id=a168.7>vígðe Sigorðr byscop enn Ríke, es vas með Óláfe kononge <anchor id=a168.8>Tryggva syne; en skírðe Þóre&mdash;af þeim knerre ero brandar fyr <anchor id=a168.9>durom lenge síðan í Mikla-garðe, veðr-spáer miok <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>allt fram um <anchor id=a168.10>daga Branz byscop<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. Ormr vas son Þóris; hann myrðe Gretter<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a168.11>Ásmundar son.&mdash;Um Þóre orte Gretter þetta:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a168.12>Ríðkat ek ræki-meiðom ...
    <l><anchor id=a168.13>Hnecki ek frá þar es flockar ...
</lg>

<p n=20.2.1><anchor id=a168.14>Án hét son Þóris, faðer Arnar, <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Ingibiargar m. Scums, f. Þórkels <anchor id=a168.15>ábóta<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=20.3><anchor id=a168.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Máne hét maðr; hann vas f&oeacute;ddr í Omð á Háloga-lande. <anchor id=a168.17>Hann fór til Íslannz, ok braut við Tior-nes, ok bió at Mán<hi>a</hi>-&aoacute; <anchor id=a168.18>nockora vetr. Síðan rak B&aolig;ðolfr hann braut þaðan; ok nam hann <anchor id=a168.19>þá fyr neðan Kalfaborgar-&aoacute;, á miðle Fliótz ok Rauða-skriðo, ok <anchor id=a168.20>bió at Mána-felle: hans son vas Ketill, es átte Védíse<note place=apparatus id=an168.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> S; Valdíse, vell.</note> Þórbranz<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a169.1><pb id=pb169 n=169><note place=margin>[232: iii. 20.]</note>dóttor, es keypte Rauða-skriðo-land at Mána: hans dótter vas <anchor id=a169.2>Dalla, syster Þórgeirs Galta sonar. Hána átte Þórvalldr<note place=apparatus id=an169.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórvalldr]</ab> S; Hroaldr, vell. (badly).</note> Hialta <anchor id=a169.3>son.

<p n=20.4><anchor id=a169.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Liótr Óþveginn hét maðr, es nam Keldo-hverfe upp frá <anchor id=a169.5>Keldo-nese: hans son vas Gríss, faðer Galta í Áse; hann vas vitr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a169.6>maðr, ok víga-maðr mikill<note place=apparatus id=an169.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann vas ... mikill]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=20.5><anchor id=a169.7><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Onundr nam ok Keldo-hverfe upp frá Keldo-nese, ok bió í <anchor id=a169.8>Áse: hann vas son Bl&oelig;ings Sóta sonar, bróðer Balca í Hrúta-firðe. <anchor id=a169.9>Dótter Onundar vas Þórbi&aolig;rg, es átte Hallgils Þórbranz son <anchor id=a169.10>or Rauða-skriðo.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>


<p n=21.1><anchor id=a169.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>21.</hi> 1.</ab> Þórsteinn sonr Sigmundar, Gnúpa Bárðar sonar, <anchor id=a169.12>bió fyrst at Mý-vatne. Hans son vas Þórgrímr, <anchor id=a169.13>faðer Arnórs í Reykja-hlíð, es átte Þórkotlo, dóttor B&aolig;ðvars, Hrólfs <anchor id=a169.14>sonar or Gnúpo-felle. Þeirra son vas B&aolig;ðvarr.

<p n=21.2><anchor id=a169.15><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þórkell enn Háve kom ungr til Íslannz; ok bió fyrst at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a169.16>Gr&oeacute;na-vatne, es gengr af Mý-vatne. Hans son vas Sigmundr, es <anchor id=a169.17>átte Vígdíse, dóttor Þóris af Espi-hóle.&mdash;Hann vá Glúmr á akrenom<note place=apparatus id=an169.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> ackr-, vell.</note> <anchor id=a169.18>Vitaz-giafa.&mdash;Dótter Þórkels vas Arndís, es átte Vígfúss, bróðer <anchor id=a169.19>Víga-Glúms. Þórkell gat son í elle sínne; sá hét Dagr; hann vas <anchor id=a169.20>faðer Þórarens<note place=apparatus id=an169.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann vas faðer Þórarens]</ab> add. S.</note>, es átte Yngvilde, dóttor Hallz af Síðo, síðarr enn<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a169.21>Eyjolfr enn Halte.

<p n=21.3><anchor id=a169.22><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Geire hét maðr, es fyrr bió fyr sunnan Mý-vatn á Geira-st&aolig;ðom: <anchor id=a170.1><pb id=pb170 n=170><note place=margin>[234: iii. 20.]</note>hans son vas Glúmr scáld, ok Þórkell. Þeir Geire feðgar <anchor id=a170.2>b&aolig;rðosk við Þórgeir H&oelig;ggvin-kinna, ok feldo Þórstein son hans. <anchor id=a170.3>Fyr þat vog vóro þeir g&oelig;rver norðan or sveitom. Geire sat um <anchor id=a170.4>vetr á Geira-st&aolig;ðom við Húna-vatn. Síðan fóro þeir í Breiða-fi&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a170.5>ok bioggo á Geira-st&aolig;ðom í Króks-firðe<note place=apparatus id=an170.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Krox-, vell.</note>. Glúmr feck<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a170.6>Ingunnar, dóttor Þórolfs, Véleifs sonar. Þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau <anchor id=a170.7>Þórðr, es átte Goðrúno Usvifrs<note place=apparatus id=an170.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Osvífs, S.</note> dóttor; ok Þórgerðr, es átte Þórarenn <anchor id=a170.8>Ingiallz son: þeirra son Helgo-Steinarr.


<p n=22.1><anchor id=a170.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>22.</hi> 1.</ab> Torf-einarr iarl gat dóttor í &oeacute;sko<note place=apparatus id=an170.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&oeacute;sko]</ab> S; elle, vell.</note> sínne, sú hét <anchor id=a170.10>Þórdís, hána f&oelig;dde R&aolig;gnvalldr iarl, ok gifte hána<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a170.11>Þórgeire Claufa: þeirra son vas Einarr; hann fór til Orkneyja, at <anchor id=a170.12>finna frændr sína; þeir vildo eige taka við frændseme hans. Þá <anchor id=a170.13>fór hann til Íslannz með tveimr<note place=apparatus id=an170.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tveimr]</ab> ii, vell.</note> br&oeacute;ðrom, Vestmanne ok Vémunde. <anchor id=a170.14>Þeir siglðo fyr norðan land, ok vestr um Slétto í fi&aolig;rðenn. Þeir <anchor id=a170.15>setto &oelig;xe í Reistar-gnúp: ok k&aolig;lloðo því &OElig;xar-fí&aolig;rð. Þeir setto<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a170.16>&aolig;rn upp fyr vestan: ok k&aolig;lloðo þar Arnar-þúfo. Enn í þriðja <anchor id=a170.17>stað setto þeir cross: þar kalla þeir Cross-ás. Svá helgoðo þeir <anchor id=a170.18>ser allan &OElig;xar-fi&aolig;rð.

<p><anchor id=a170.19>B&aolig;rn Einars vóro þau Eyjolfr, es Galte Grísar<note place=apparatus id=an170.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Grisar]</ab> S; Griss, vell.</note> son vá; ok Liót, <anchor id=a170.20>móðer Hróa ens Skarpa, es hefnde Eyjolfs, ok vá Galta. Syner<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a170.21>Gliro-Halla, Brandr ok Bergr, vóro d&oeacute;tr-syner Liótar, es<note place=apparatus id=an170.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es]</ab> þeir, S.</note> féllo í <anchor id=a170.22>B&aolig;ðvars-dale.

<pb id=pb171 n=171><note place=margin>[235: III. 20.]</note>

<p n=22.2><anchor id=a171.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Reistr hét maðr, son Biarneyja-Ketils, ok Hildar, systor Ketils <anchor id=a171.2>Þistils, f&aolig;ðor Arnsteins Goða, hann nam land miðle Reistar-gnúps <anchor id=a171.3>ok Rauða-gnúps, ok bió í Leir-h&aolig;fn.

<p n=22.3><anchor id=a171.4><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Arngeirr hét maðr, es nam Slétto alla miðle Hávarar-lóns, <anchor id=a171.5>ok Sveinungs-víkr. Hans b&aolig;rn vóro þau Þórgils, ok Oddr<note place=apparatus id=an171.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Odde, S.</note>; ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a171.6>Þóríðr, es Steinolfr í Þiórsár-dale átte.

<p n=22.4><anchor id=a171.7><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Óddr vas elld-sætr í &oeacute;rsko ok seinligr, ok vas kallaðr kol&shy;bítr. <anchor id=a171.8>Þeir Arngeirr ok Þórgils gengo heiman í fiúke at leita feár, <anchor id=a171.9>ok kvómo eige heim. Oddr fór at leita þeirra, ok fann þá báða <anchor id=a171.10>&oelig;renda, ok hafðe hvíta-bi&aolig;rn drepet þá<note place=apparatus id=an171.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þeir Arng ... drepet þá]</ab> S; Hvita biorn drap þá bádá Arngeir ok Þorgils: Oddr fór at leita þeirra, H.</note>, ok só or þeim blóðet<note place=apparatus id=an171.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok só or þ. bl.]</ab> ok lá þá á pasti, S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a171.11>Oddr drap bi&aolig;rnenn, ok f&oeacute;rðe heim, ok át allan; ok kallaðesk þá <anchor id=a171.12>hefna f&aolig;ðor síns, es hann drap bi&aolig;rnenn; en þá bróðor síns, es <anchor id=a171.13>hann át hann. Oddr vas síðan íllr ok údæll við at eige. Hann <anchor id=a171.14>vas svá miok hamramr, at hann geck heiman or Hraun-h&aolig;fn um <anchor id=a171.15>kveldet, en kom um morgin efter í Þiórsár-dal, til liðs við Þóríðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a171.16>systor sína, es Þiórs-d&oeacute;ler vildo grýta hána fyrer fiol-kynge ok <anchor id=a171.17>trollskap<note place=apparatus id=an171.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> vildo berja grióte í hel, S.</note>.

<p n=22.5><anchor id=a171.18><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Sveinungr ok Colle n&aoacute;mo víkr þær es við þá ero kendar, <anchor id=a171.19>Sveinungs-vík ok Collz-vík.

<p n=22.6><anchor id=a171.20><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Ketill hét maðr Þistill, íllr ok údæll; hann nam Þistils-fi&aolig;rð<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a172.1><pb id=pb172 n=172><note place=margin>[237: iv. 1.]</note>á miðle Húns-ness ok Sauða-ness. Hans son vas Sigmundr, es <anchor id=a172.2>land nam á Snæfellz-nese<note place=apparatus id=an172.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> S; Sniofallz-, vell.</note>. Hann vas faðer Laugar-brecko-Einars.

<p><anchor id=a172.3><note place=apparatus id=an172.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> S adds this paragraph.</note>Nú ero ritin Land-n&aoacute;m í Norðlendinga-fiorðunge.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 id=en.lib3 n=III lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<!-- LIB. III. -->

<p n=0.1>III. Here beginneth the Settlement of the <hi rend=sc>North-country-men&apos;s Quarter</hi>.

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-stan Mein-fret</hi>, the son of Alf of Ost, took in settlement East Ram-frith-strand, next after Balci, and dwelt there certain winters before he went to settle in the Dales, and took to wife Thor-hild, the daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Their sons were these: Alf-a-Dale, Thord, and Thor-wolf, Ref [Fox] and Hrapp.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-ord</hi> was the name of a man that took land in Ram-frith in settlement, and dwelt at Thor-ord&apos;s-stead. His son was Arn-or Tuft-nose, who had to wife Gerd, daughter of Bead-ware of Bead-ware&apos;s-hills. Their sons were these: Thor-beorn whom Grette slew, and Thor-ord Pæan-stump who made Un-fey&apos;s verses, the father of Wal-gerd, whom Sceg Short-hand had to wife. <hi>He was</hi> the son of Gamle, the son of Thord, the son of Ey-wolf, the son of Ey-here, the son of Thor-wolf <pb id=pb123a n=123>Fast-hold of Snow-fell. The son of Sceg Short-hand was Gamle, the father of Alf-dis, the mother of Ord the monk.


<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Scautad Sceg</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Beard</hi> was the name of a nobleman in Norway. His son was Beorn, who was called Skin-Beorn, for he was a traveller to Holm-garth [<hi>where he carried on his trade</hi>]. He came to Iceland, and took in settlement Mid-frith and Flax-acre-dale. His son was Mid-frith Sceg; he was a great warrior [S: and merchant].

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He harried in the Baltic, and lay in Denmark off Sea-land. He was pitched on by lot to break into the barrow of king Hrod-wolf Crake; and out of it he took Scofnung, the sword of Hrod-wolf, and the ax of Hialte [Shelty], and much other riches; but he could not get Leaf [the sword], for Bead-were was ready to make for him, but king Hrod-wolf defended him [i.e. Sceg].

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Afterwards he went to Iceland, and dwelt at Reeks in Mid-frith, and had to wife Hall-bera, Grim&apos;s daughter. The sons of Sceg were these: Eid [Aid], who had to wife Haf-thora, the daughter of Thor-berg Cairn-mull and of A-lof Ellidi-shield, the sister of Thor-gar Gollne. These had many children. Another son of Sceg was Coll, the father of Hall-dor, the father of these,&mdash;Thor-dis, whom poet Helge had to wife, and Thor-katla. Sceg&apos;s daughters were these: Hrod-ny, whom Thord Gelle had to wife, and Thor-borg, whom Os-beorn the Wealthy, the son of Haurd, had to wife. Their daughters were Inge-borg, whom Illuge <pb id=pb124a n=124>the Black, of Gil&apos;s-beck, had to wife. Their sons were Gund-laug Worm-tongue, Hrod-mund, and Cetil.


<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Harald Ring</hi> was the name of a man of great family. He came in his ship to West-hope, and sat there the first winter near to the place where he had landed, which is now called Ring-stead. He took in settlement all Water-ness from seaward as far as Bond-maid&apos;s-river to west, all the way up [south] to Thwart-water, and over across to Brage-mouth, and on both sides of Crags north to the sea, and dwelt at Hills. His son was Thor-brand, the father of Os-brand, the father of Solwi the Proud [<hi>or</hi> Brude] of Egi-side, and also of Thor-gar [i.e. Thor-brand&apos;s son] that dwelt at Hills. His daughter was Ast-rid, whom Arn-mod Hedin&apos;s son had to wife. Hedin was the son of them. Another daughter of Thor-gar was Thor-gerd, whom Thor-grim, son of Peter of Oyce, had to wife.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Soti</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement West-hope, and dwelt under Soti-fell.


<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hound Stan-here</hi> was the name of an earl in England. He had to wife A-lof, the daughter of Regin-here Lod-broc [Shaggy-breech]. Their children were these: Beorn, the father of Ead-wine Shackle, and Eiric, the father of Sig-rod Bladder-pate, and Is-gerd, whom earl Thore of Werm-land had to wife.

<p n=4.1.1>Ead-wine Shackle came to Iceland, and took Willow-dale in settlement, and dwelt at Ead-wine&apos;s-stead. With him there came out Thor-gils Geller, his fellow, the father of Thor-arin <hi>gode</hi>. Ead-wine Shackle was the father of Thora Moss-neck, the mother of Wolf-hild, whom <pb id=pb125a n=125>God-brand Cula had to wife. Their daughter was Asta, the mother of king Olaf the Saint. [Two lines blank.] The son of Ead-wine Shackle was As-gar of As-gar-river. He had to wife Ior-unth <hi>or</hi> Ear-wynd, the daughter of Ingi-mund the Old. Their children were these: Thor-wald, the father of Dalla [the Blind], the mother of bishop Gizor; and Ead-wine, the father of As-gar, the father of Ead-wine, the father of Egil, who had to wife Wolf-hild, the daughter of Ey-wolf Gud-mund&apos;s son [<hi>lat. add.</hi>], and it was their son Ey-wolf that was slain at the All-Moot, the father of Worm the chaplain of bishop Thor-lac the Saint. Another son of Ead-wine Shackle was Ey-stan, father of Thor-stan, the father of Helge, the father of Thor-worm, the father of Ord, the father of Hall-beorn, the father of priest Sigh-wat. The daughter of As-gar of As-gar&apos;s-river was Thor-borg the Pride-of-the-Bench.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Worm</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Worms-dale, and dwelt there. He was the father of Ord, the father of Thor-wald [S: Thor-ord], the father of Helge, the father of Harre, the father of Iora, the mother of Thor-dis, the mother of Tand [Tadg], the father of Skafte [<hi>Shafto</hi>].


<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil the Ream</hi> was the name of a noble herse <hi>or</hi> lord of Ream&apos;s-dale in Norway. He was the son of Worm Shell-mull, the son of Hors-beorn, the son of Ream, the son of Iotun-beorn [Ettyn-Beorn], out of the north of Norway. Cetil had to wife Miolla, the daughter of An the Bow-swayer. Their son&apos;s name was Thor-stan. He slew in a wood of the Uplands, at the egging of his father [Cetil], Iockle, the son <pb id=pb126a n=126>of earl Ingi-mund of Gaut-land and of Wigdis. Iockle gave him his life; and afterwards he took to wife Thor-dis his [Iockle&apos;s] sister.

<p n=5.1.1>Their son was <hi rend=sc>Ingi-mund the Old</hi>. He was brought up in the isle Hefne with Thori, the father of Grim and Hrod-mund. Heid the Sibyl prophesied to them all that they should settle in a land that was as yet undiscovered west over the sea. But Ingi-mund said that he would not do that. But the Sibyl declared that he would not be able to help it; and also told this, as a token, that the lot <hi>or</hi> teraph would disappear out of his purse, saying that he would find it when he dug a place to set up his porch-pillars in that land.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ingi-mund was a great wicking <hi>or</hi> warrior, and harried in the west on wicking cruises. <hi rend=sc>Sæ-mund</hi> was the name of his fellow <hi>or</hi> partner, a Southrey-man. They came back from warring at the time that king Harold was coming to the land and going forth to the battle in Hafr&apos;s-frith against Thore Long-chin and his fellows. Ingi-mund was minded to give help to the king, but not Sæ-mund; and the two partners parted there. After the battle king Harold gave in wedlock to Ingi-mund Wig-dis, the daughter of earl Thore the Silent. She and Eor-wend Halse <hi>or</hi> Neck were his children by his leman. Ingi-mund could find no peace, wherefore king Harold would have had him seek his fate in Iceland, but Ingi-mund said that he had never been minded to do so. Nevertheless he sent two Fins to go to Iceland to get back his lot <hi>or</hi> teraph, which was a Frey made of silver. The Fins came back, and they had found the teraph, but could not get it. They told that it was in <pb id=pb127a n=127>a dale between three [two] holts, and they told him how all the land lay, and of what kind it was which he was to settle in there.

<p n=5.2.1>After this Ingi-mund got ready to go to Iceland, and Eor-wend Neck with him, his brother-in-law; and Ey-wind Sarcwe and As-mund and Hwate his friends; and his thralls, Frith-mund and Bead-were and Thore, Rof-sceg and Wolf-kell. They made Grim&apos;s-river-mouth in the south of the land, and stayed the winter through in Hwan-eyre with Grim, Ingi-mund&apos;s sworn brother. But in the spring they went north over the heath. They came into a frith, where they found two rams, and called it therefore Ram-frith. Then they went north over the country round, and named places far and wide. In the winter he stayed in Willow-dale at Ingi-mund&apos;s-holt: thence they could see a snowless mountain to the south-east, and went that way in the spring. Then Ingi-mund saw and knew the land that had been pointed out to him. Thor-dis his daughter was born at Thor-dis-holt.

<p n=5.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ingi-mund took in settlement all Water-dale up from Helge-mere and Wierd-mere in the east. He dwelt at Temple, and found his teraph there as he was digging to set up his porch-pillars. Thor-stan was the son of him and Wig-dis, and [also] Iockle and Thore Goat-thigh, and Hagene. Smith was the name of the son of Ingi-mund and a bondmaid, and his daughters were Eor-wynd and Thor-dis.

<p n=5.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eor-wend Halse</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Neck</hi> took in settlement land west of Horst-mere and up to Mo-gils-beck, and dwelt at Ground under Eor-wend-fell. His son was Mar [Mór] of Mar-stead.

<pb id=pb128a n=128><p n=5.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hwate</hi> took land west from Mo-gils-beck to Gills, and dwelt at Hwate-stead.

<p n=5.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>As-mund</hi> took in settlement land west from Helge-mere over the Thing-eyre country, and dwelt under Peak.

<p n=5.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Frith-mund</hi> took in settlement For-sun-dale.

<p n=5.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind Sorcwe</hi> took in settlement Blond-dale. His sons were Her-mund and Hrod-mund Halt.

<p n=5.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Ingi-mund lit upon a white she-bear, and two cubs with her, on a mere there, and called it Cub-mere. After that Ingi-mund went abroad, and gave the bears to king Harold. White bears had never been seen before in Norway. Then king Harold gave Ingi-mund the ship <hi>Stepper</hi>, with a cargo of wood aboard of her, and he sailed back to Iceland with his two ships; and sailed the north-west course round the Skaw first of all men, and held on his way to Cub-mere, to a place that is now called Stepper-dock, hard by Thing-eyre.

<p>After this Raven the Eastman stayed with Ingi-mund, and he had a good sword, and carried it into the Temple; wherefore Ingi-mund took it from him.

<p n=5.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hall-worm</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Thor-orm</hi>, two brethren, came out and stayed with Ingi-mund. Then Hall-worm took to wife Thor-dis, Ingi-mund&apos;s daughter, and then followed her hence as her marriage portion Cairn&apos;s-water-land. Their son was Thor-grim, the Cairn&apos;s-water <hi>gode</hi>. Thor-orm dwelt at Thor-orm&apos;s-tongue.

<p n=5.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Ingi-mund lost ten swine, and they were found the next harvest-tide <pb id=pb129a n=129>in Swine-dale, and there were then a hundred swine together. The boar was called Beigad [....]; he leapt into Swine-mere, and swam till his hooves fell off, and he died of exhaustion at Beigad&apos;s hillock <hi>or</hi> knoll.

<p n=5.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-laf the Big</hi>, and <hi rend=sc>Leot</hi> his mother, came out and put into Borg-frith. They went north over the country side, and got no steadfast abode till they got to Sæmunds in Shaw-frith. Hrod-laf was the son of Arn-old, the brother of Sæmund, wherefore he directed them north to Thord at Head-strand, and he gave him [Hrod-laf] land in Hrod-laf&apos;s-dale, and there he dwelt. Hrod-laf beguiled Hrod-ny, the daughter of Una [Unadh] of Unad&apos;s-dale. Ord, Una&apos;s son, waylaid him, and slew Leot his sister&apos;s son; but wounded Hrod-laf himself on the foot, for iron would not bite on his kirtle. Hrod-laf slew Ord and two of his men beside, but two got away. For this Thord o&apos; Head made him and his mother outlaws in the hundred, as far as the rivers ran into Shaw-frith. Then Sæmund sent Hrod-laf to Ingi-mund the Old; he set him down at Ord&apos;s-ridge, over against Temple.

<p n=5.12.1>He had a fishery in Water-dale-river with Ingi-mund; and the Temple men had the first right of going on the river to fish. But Hrod-laf would not yield the river to the sons of Ingi-mund, and they fought across the river. This was told to Ingi-mund, who was then blind, and he bade a sheep-boy lead his horse under him to the river between them [where they were fighting]. Hrod-laf cast a spear and hit him, and then he and the boy turned home. Ingi-mund sent the boy to tell Hrod-laf; and he <pb id=pb130a n=130>was dead in his high seat when his sons came home. Hrod-laf told his mother; and she said it should be tried whether the luck of Ingi-mund&apos;s sons or her knowledge [magic] should prevail; but bade him first go away. Thor-stan was set to espy after Hrod-laf, for which he was to get his choice out of the heritage. Ingi-mund&apos;s sons would not sit in the high seat after their father. They went north to Gar-mund, and Thor-stan gave him sixty pieces of silver to thrust Hrod-laf away. Ingi-mund&apos;s sons tracked his slot from the north over Neck to Water-dale. Thor-stan sent his house-carle to the Ridge to spy. He said that he could say twelve verses ere they answered the door. He saw a pile of clothes by the door-posts, and from under it a red coat sticking out. Thor-stan said that must have been Hrod-laf, and that Leot must have sacrificed to get him a long life. They went up to Ridge, and Thor-stan wished to waylay the door, sitting above it; but could not, because of Iockle, who wished to sit there. A man walked out and craned about; and the second man that came out led Hrod-laf after him. Iockle sprang up, and fell down off the wood-stack, but yet was able to cast the kevel to his brethren [as a sign]. He made for Hrod-laf, and they both rolled down the slope, but Iockle was uppermost. Then Thor-stan came up, and they took to their weapons. By this time Leot had got out, and she was walking backward; she had her head between her legs, and her clothes up over her back. Iockle cut off Hrod-laf&apos;s head, and cast it in Leot&apos;s face. Then she said that she was come too late, &lsquo;and if I had come sooner, the earth would have turned over before the look of my eyes, and ye should all have gone mad.&rsquo;

<pb id=pb131a n=131><p n=5.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> After that Thor-stan chose Temple-land; but Iockle kept the sword, and dwelt at Tongue. Thore had the gode-ship <hi>or</hi> priesthood, and dwelt at Undern-fell [Afternoon-fell], and went Bearsack&apos;s way [became mad at times]. Hagene had Stepper, and was a merchant-shipper. Smith dwelt at Smith-stead. Thor-stan had to wife Thor-rid, the priestess, the daughter of Sol-mund of Os-beorn&apos;s-ness. Their sons were Ing-wolf the Fair and Gud-brand. Iockle was the son of Bard, Iockle&apos;s son, whom king Olaf the Saint had slain. Iockle, the highway-man, had said that unkindly <hi>or</hi> unlucky slaughter should long hold in their family. [Space of four lines, though nothing seems to be missing.]

<p n=5.14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind Aud-cula</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Swine-dale, and dwelt at Aud-cula-stead.

<p n=5.15><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-gils the Yeller</hi> dwelt at Swine-mere. He had come out with Ead-wine Shackle. His sons were these: Fat-Orm and his brethren, that slew Sharp-hedin We-fred&apos;s son at Water&apos;s-scard or Mere-pass.

<p n=5.16><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind Sorcwe</hi> took in settlement Bland-dale, as it is written before. His son was Hrod-mund the Halt, who slew Hagene, Ingi-mund&apos;s son, when Mór and the sons of Ingi-mund were fighting over Feud-shelf, wherefore he was made an outlaw in the North-country-men&apos;s Quarter. His sons were these: Thor-beorn and Heah-stan, that fought with Sleight-Helge in Ram-frith. Another son of Ey-wind Sorcwi was Her-mund, the father of Hilda, whom A-wald Ingi-ald&apos;s son had to wife. Their children were these: Col-finna, whom Gris Sæming&apos;s son had to <pb id=pb132a n=132>wife, and Brand, who slew Galte Oht-here&apos;s son at the Cub-mere-moot for a lampoon of Hall-fred&apos;s.

<p n=5.17><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Colcan</hi> [Colgan] was the name of a man that took in settlement Colca-mire, and dwelt there as long as he lived.


<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Æw-here</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Cetil Slate-flag, and of Thor-rid, the daughter of king Harold Gold-beard of Sogn. The sons of Æw-here were We-fred and [S: his bastard sons] Carle, and Thor-beorn Stew, and Thord the Big. Æw-here went to Iceland from his wicking cruises, with all his sons save We-fred. He stayed behind on wicking cruises. With him there came out Gund-stan his kinsman, and Ead-wolf, and Geat.

<p n=6.1.1>Æw-here came in his ship to Blond-mouth. At that time all the land was taken and settled west of River Blond. Æw-here went up along River Blond to seek him a place to take and settle in, and reached the place which is called Mo-bergs-brink. He set up a high pole there, and declared that he took a place for a homestead there for We-fred his son. Then he took all Long-dale up thence, and so along to the mouth of the Neck. There he gave out land among his shipmates. Æw-here dwelt at Æw-here-pass.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> We-fred came out later, and landed at the mouth of Gong-scard-water <hi>or</hi> Gong-pass-river, and went thence south to his father, and Æw-here did not know him. They wrestled so that every pillar in the house was torn up before We-fred said who he was.  He set up housekeeping at Mo-berg, as was settled beforehand, and Thor-beorn <pb id=pb133a n=133>Stew at Stew-stead, and Gund-stan at Gund-stan-stead, Carle at Carle-stead, Thord Mickle at Mickle-stead, Ead-wolf at Ead-wolf-stead.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Geat settled at Geat&apos;s-dale. He was one-handed. Ey-wind Sorcwe and he did for themselves, for they would not live after Ingi-mund the Old. Hawk dwelt at the place that is called Hawk-stead. We-fred had to wife Gund-hild, daughter of Eiric of God-dales, the sister of Battle-Wager-Starre. Their sons were these: Wolf-hedin, whom Fast-wolf and Thrott-wolf slew at Grind-beck; and Scarp-hedin, whom Orm the Fat and his fellows slew at Water-pass; and Hun-red, the father of Mór, the father of Hafledi.

<p n=6.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hollte</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Lang-dale down from Mo-berg, and dwelt at Holte-stead. He was the father of Is-red, the father of Is-laf, the father of Thor-wald, the father of Thor-arin the Sage. Thor-wald&apos;s daughter was Thor-dis, whom Hall-dor, the son of Snorri <hi>gode</hi>, had to wife. Their daughters were these: Thor-katla, whom Gud-laug, Thor-fin&apos;s son of Stream-frith, had to wife, whence are the <hi rend=sc>Sturlungs</hi> come and the <hi rend=sc>Ord-biders</hi>; the other was Gud-run, whom Ceartan, the son of As-gar of Water-frith, had to wife. Their son was Thor-wald, the father of Thord o&apos; Water-frith, and Inge-rid, whom Gud-laug the priest had to wife.

<p n=6.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wager-Battle-Moon</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Shaw-strand from the west into Moon-tump, and dwelt at Moon-wick. His daughter Thor-brand-a-Dale had to wife, the father of Moon, the father of Calf the poet.

<p n=6.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ei-lif Erne</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Atle, the son of <pb id=pb134a n=134>Scid the Old, the son of Bard of Al. Ei-lif took land in settlement from Moon-tump to Gong-scard-water and Lax-water-dale, and dwelt there. He had to wife Thor-laug, the daughter of Sæ-mund o&apos; Lithe. Their sons were these: Sol-mund, the father of Gud-mund, the father of Slaughter-Bard and his brethren. Another son was Atle the Strong, who had to wife Her-dis, the daughter of Thord o&apos; Head. Their children were these: Thor-laug, whom Gud-mund the Mighty had to wife, and Thor-arin, who had to wife Halla, the daughter of Eor-wend Neck. Their son was Styr-beorn, who had to wife Yngw-hild, the daughter of Stan-red, the son of Hedin of Hedin&apos;s-head. Their daughter was Erne-dis <hi>or</hi> Arn-dis, whom Hamal, the son of Thor-mod, the son of Thor-kell, had to wife. The son of Ei-lif Erne was Codran o&apos; Gills-water, the father of Thor-wald the Far-farer, and Theod-wolf gode of Temple on Shaw-strand, and Ey-stan, the father of Thor-wald Tin-tan and of Thor-stan Heathman-ing, and Erne o&apos; Fleet.


<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sæ-mund o&apos; the Southreys</hi> [Sodor Islands], the fellow <hi>or</hi> partner of Ingi-mund the Old, as hath been written before, came hither in his ship to the mouth of Gong-scard-river. Sæ-mund took in settlement all Sæ-mund-lithe as far as Water-pass down from Sæ-mund-beck, and dwelt at Gar-mund-stead. His son was Gar-mund that dwelt there afterwards. The daughter of Sæ-mund was Regin-bera, whom Thor-ord Helm had to wife. Their daughter was Hall-bera, the mother of Gudmund the Mighty, the father of Ey-wolf, the father of Thor-ey, the mother of Sæ-mund the historian. Arnold was the name of another son of Sæ-mund. <hi>He was</hi> the father of Riupa [Caper-cailzie], whom <pb id=pb135a n=135>Thor-gar, the son of Thord o&apos; Head, had to wife. Their son was Hall-dor of Temple.

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Scefil</hi> was the name of a man that came in his ship into the mouth of Gong-scard-water in the same week as Sæ-mund. But while Sæ-mund was carrying fire about his settlement, Scefil took in settlement all the land west of Sheep-river, taking it out of Sæ-mund&apos;s settlement without his leave; but Sæ-mund let it stand so.

<p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wolf-leot</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Lang-holt, all down from Sæ-mund&apos;s-beck.

<p n=7.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-kell Wingne</hi>, the son of Atle, the son of Scide the Old. He took land in settlement all over Water-dale and Swart-water-dale. His son was Arn-mod Squint, the father of Galte, the father of Thor-gar, the father of Styrme, the father of Hall, the father of Col-fina.

<p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Elf-gar</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement in Elf-gar&apos;s-field and up to Meal-fell-water, and dwelt at Elf-gar&apos;s-field.

<p n=7.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> There was a man whose name was <hi rend=sc>Thor-wide</hi> that took land in settlement up from Meal-fells-water to Gills-water.

<p n=7.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Horse-kell</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement all Swart-water-dale and all Yra-fells-land with the counsel of Eiric. He took in settlement up to Gil-haye, and dwelt at Yra-fell. He had a thrall that was called Roth-ric. He sent him up along Meal-fell-dale in quest of land south on the Keel. He came to a gill that turned south out of Meal-fell-dale, which is now called Roth-ric&apos;s-gill. There he set <pb id=pb136a n=136>up a fresh barked staff, which they called Land-kenner or Land-searcher, and after that he turned back again.

<p n=7.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>We-kell [Cetil] the Skin-strong</hi> [lycanthrope] was the name of a man that took land down from Gills to Meal-fell-ness, and dwelt at Meal-fell. He got news of the journey of Roth-ric; and a little later he went south on the fell in quest of land, and came to the barrows that are now called We-kell&apos;s howes. He cast [his spear <hi>or</hi> arrow] between the barrows, and then turned back again.

<p n=7.8.1>But when Eiric of God-dale got news of this, he sent his thrall, whose name was Rongud, southward on the fell. He too went to seek out land. He came south to Blond-springs, and then went up along the river that falls from the west of Hwin-ware-dale and west on to the lava <hi>or</hi> rawn between Reek-field and Keel, and there came on a man&apos;s slots <hi>or</hi> tracks, and guessed that they must have come from the south. He piled up a cairn there, which is now called Rongud&apos;s cairn. From this place he went back, and Eiric gave him his freedom for his journey. But thenceforward there came about journeying over the mountains between the South-country-men and the North-country-men.


<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eiric</hi> was the name of a nobleman. He came out of Norway to Iceland. He was the son of Hrod-wald, the son of Gar-mund, the son of Eiric Ordig-beardie. Eiric took land in settlement from Gills, over all God-dale, and down to North-water, and dwelt at Temple in God-dale. He had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thord-beardie<corr sic=.>,</corr> the sister of Helge, whom Cetil-beorn the Old of Moss-fell had to wife. <pb id=pb137a n=137>The children of her and Eiric were these: Thor-kell and Hrod-wald, Thor-gar and Battle-wager Starre, and daughter Gund-hild. Thor-gar Eiric&apos;s son had to wife Yngw-hild, Thor-gar&apos;s daughter. Their daughter was Rand-weig, whom Beorn-beord Helge&apos;s son had to wife. We-fred Æw-here&apos;s son had to wife Gund-hild, Eiric&apos;s daughter.

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Crow Hred-here</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Un-fey Hang-beard, the son of Oxen-Thori. He and his father made ready their ship and sailed to Iceland; and when they came in sight of land Hred-here went to the mast, and declared that he would not throw overboard the porch-pillars, saying that he would rather make a vow to Thunder <hi>or</hi> Thor, that he would point out to him the land he was to settle in; and he declared that he would fight for it, if it were already taken in settlement by another. And he put into Shaw-frith, and sailed up to Borg-sand, and ran his ship ashore. Haward Heron came to him, and asked him to his house, and he was there through the winter at Heron-ness.

<p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> In the spring Haward asked him what he meant to do; but he said that he had a mind to fight with Sæ-mund for land. But Haward spoke against this, and said that it would turn out ill; and bade him go to see Eiric o&apos; God-dales and take counsel of him, &lsquo;for he is the wisest man in this country.&rsquo; Hred-here did so; and when he found Eiric, he spoke against such a breach of the peace [as this would be], and said that it was a thing not to be spoken of that men should be in feud when there was such lack of men in the country; and [furthermore] he said, that he <pb id=pb138a n=138>would rather give him all the Tongue down from Hall-mire, saying that Thunder had directed him thither, and that his prow had pointed thither as he sailed to Borg-sand, and that this country would be enough and to spare for him and his sons. Hred-here took this advice, and dwelt at Stan-stead. He wished to die into Meal-fell. His son was Un-fey Thin-beard, the father of Beorn, the father of Stan o&apos; Tongue.

<p n=8.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> There was a man called <hi rend=sc>Helm-wolf</hi> that took land in settlement down over Blond-lithe. His son was Thor-grim Cog, the father of Ord in Shoulder-hay, the father of Seal-Calf.  Thence are come the <hi rend=sc>Shoulder-hay-men</hi>.

<p n=8.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ean-wend the Wise</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement up from Mark-gill, all the East-dale from the east. But when Eiric wished to go and take in settlement the whole dale from the west, Ean-wend cast the sacrificial rods <hi>or</hi> chips, so that he should know the time when Eiric was about to take it in settlement; and then Ean-wend was the quicker, and shot a [burning] tinder-arrow across the river, and hallowed to himself the land from the west, and dwelt between the rivers.

<p n=8.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Care</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement between North-water and Mark-gill, and dwelt at Flat-tongue. From him are come the <hi rend=sc>Silver-stead-men</hi>.

<p n=8.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-brand Orrec</hi> [.....] took land in settlement up from Bolster-river, all Silver-stead-side, and all North-water-dale from the north, and dwelt at Thor-brand-stead; and let build there a fire-house <hi>or</hi> <pb id=pb139a n=139>hall so great that all the men that went that way over the dale might drive their pack-horses through, and there was meat free for all. After him Orrec-stead is called up from Hawk-stead. He was a well-born man, and of great family.

<p n=8.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thore Dove-neb</hi> was a freedman of Oxen-Thore. He came in his ship into the mouth of Gong-scard-water. The whole country side to the west was settled ere this; so he went north over Iockle-water to Land-slip, and took land in settlement between Gleed-blast-water and Deep-water, and dwelt at Fly-mere.

<p n=8.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> At that time there came out a ship into the mouth of Colban&apos;s-river oyce-mouth laden with live stock, and they lost in Brine-ness-shaw a young mare; and Thore Dove-neb bought the chance of finding her, and found her. She was the swiftest of all horses, and was called Fly. Erne was the name of a man that went about the land from point to point [a vagrant]; he was a wizard. He waylaid Thore in Win-ware-dale, against his riding south off the Keel, and wagered with Thore as to which of them had the better horse, for he had a very good stallion; and each of them laid 100 pieces of silver. They both rode south over the Keel, till they came to a course which is now called Dove-neb&apos;s-course; but there was such great difference between the horses, that Thore [had turned, and] was coming to meet Erne [who was no more than] half way up the course. Erne took the loss of his wager so to heart, that he would not live any longer; and he went up under a fell that is now called Erne&apos;s-fell, and did away with himself. But as for Fly, she was left at Dove-neb&apos;s-course, for she was <pb id=pb140a n=140>very tired; and when Thore came back from the Moot [June], he found a grey and dark-maned stallion with her. She was big with foal by him, and from these sprang Eith-fax, which was sent abroad, and was seven men&apos;s death at Miors [<hi>the lake in Norway</hi>] in one day, and perished there. Fly was lost in a moss at Fly-mire.

<p n=8.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Col-swegen the Strong</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement between Thwart-water and Chine-river, and dwelt at Col-swegen-stead; but he held his sacrifices at Temple-stead.

<p n=8.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gund-wolf</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement between Thwart-water and Gled-blast-water, and dwelt at Hwam <hi>or</hi> Cambe.


<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gorm</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Guth-thorm</hi> was the name of a noble lord <hi>or</hi> herse in Swee-ric [S: Swee-theod]. He had to wife Thora, the daughter of king Eiric at Up-sala. Their son was called Thor-gils. He had to wife Eilina [Helena], the daughter of Buris-slaf [Bogi-slav] king of Garth [Novgorod] in the east, and of Ingi-gerd, sister of Dag-stygg, king of the Risa [Russians]. Their sons were these: Her-grim and Her-fin, who had to wife Halla, daughter of Hedin and of Arn-dis <hi>or</hi> Erne-dis Hedin&apos;s daughter. The daughters of Her-fin were Groa [Gruoch] and Halla, whom Hrod-gar had to wife.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Their son was Beorn o&apos; the Plain, that took land in settlement first between Grit-water and Feud-water before Shelty and Colban came out. He dwelt at Plain-Beorn-stead. His children were Erne-wolf, that had Thor-leot, daughter of Shelty Scapl&apos;s son to wife; and Arn-beorn <pb id=pb141a n=141><hi>or</hi> Erne-beorn, that had to wife Thor-laug, daughter of Thord o&apos; Head; and Arn-ord, that had to wife Thor-ny, daughter of Sig-mund Thor-kel&apos;s son, that slew Glum. Arn-fred <hi>or</hi> Erne-fred was the name of Plain-Beorn&apos;s daughter, whom Sage Bead-were, the son of Aundott, had to wife.

<p n=9.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Aundott came out to the mouth of Colban&apos;s-river, and bought land of Plane-beorn, down from Neck-pit west way and east up to Colban&apos;s-river-mouth, and on the east way down from the brook that springs out from Neat-by and runs east to Chine river, and he dwelt at Wood-wick.

<p n=9.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sig-mund</hi> of West-fold had to wife Ingi-borg, the daughter of Red-Rug of Neam-dale, the sister of Thor-stan Swarfed. Their son was Colban. He journeyed to Iceland, and took land in settlement between Grit and Feud-water, Colban&apos;s-dale and Shelty-dale.


<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shelty</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Sholto</hi>, the son of Thord Scapl, came to Iceland and took in settlement Shelty-dale, by counsel of Colban, and dwelt at Temple. His sons were these: Thor-wald and Thord, noblemen.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> It was the noblest arval ever held in Iceland that they held over their father. They bade all the chiefs in Iceland. There were twelve hundred guests [1440], and all men of worship were led on their way with gifts. At this arval Ord, the Broad-frith man, recited the Encomium which he had made on Shelty. Glum Garasson had summoned Ord to Torsk-frith-moot for rent (?) before this came to pass, and in the <pb id=pb142a n=142>spring the sons of Shelty went from the north in their ship to Stan-grim&apos;s-frith, and then walked south over the Heath by what is now called Shelt-dale-dip, and when they walked into the moot they were so well equipped that men thought that the Anses were come there, whereon this was repeated:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>No man thought but that the most glorious Anses were coming,
    <l>When the armed sons of noble Shelty marched into Torsk-firth moot.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 62.]


<p n=10.2.1>From the Shelty sons is come a great [S: and high-born] family.


<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thord</hi> was the name of a nobleman in Norway. He was the son of Beorn Butter-keg, the son of Hrod-wald Ryg [the Rugian?], the son of As-lac <hi>or</hi> Os-lac, the son of Beorn Ironside, the son of Regin-here Lod-broc. Thord went to Iceland, and took in settlement Head-strand in Shaw-frith, between Unadh-dale-water and Hrod-laf-dale-river, and dwelt at Head.

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Thord had to wife Frid-gerd, the daughter of Thore Hima [...] and of Frid-gerd, daughter of Cear-fal [Cearbhall], king of the Irish. They had nineteen children.

<p n=11.2.1>Beorn was a son of theirs, he that had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Ref of Bard, and their children were Arn-thor Carling-neb, and Thor-dis, mother of Worm, the father of Thor-dis, the mother of Bot-olf [Bead-wolf].

<p n=11.2.2>Thor-gar was the name of another son of Thord&apos;s. He had to wife Riupa [Caper-cailzie], the daughter of Arn-old, the son of Sæ-mund. Their son was Hall-dor of Temple.

<pb id=pb143a n=143><p n=11.2.3>Snorre was the third. He had to wife Thor-hild Riupa [Caper-cailzie], the daughter of Thord-Gelli. Their son was Thord Horse-head, the father of Carle&apos;s-efni, that found Wine-land the Good [America], the father of Snorri.

<p n=11.2.4>Thor-wald Hollow-weazand was the fourth son of Thord. He came one harvest-tide to Thor-wald-stead in Side, to Smith-cell [Cathal Gowe], and dwelt there for some time. It was then that he went up to Swart&apos;s-cave and repeated there an Encomium that he had made on the Giant in the Cave. Afterwards he took to wife a daughter of Smith-cell [Cathal Gowe], and their daughter was Ior-unn, the mother of Thor-brand of Scarf-ness.

<p n=11.2.5>Bard was Thord&apos;s fifth son. He had to wife Thor-orna, the daughter of Thor-ord Helm. Their son was Dagæ [S: Dade] the poet.

<p n=11.2.6>Sax-wolf was Thord&apos;s sixth son; the seventh Thor-grim; the eighth Rod-gar; the ninth Cnorr; the tenth Thor-mod the Bald; the eleventh Stan.

<p n=11.2.7>Thord&apos;s daughters were these: Thor-laug, whom Arn-beorn Plain-beorn&apos;s son had to wife; their daughter was Gud-laug, whom Thor-lac Hos-Coll&apos;s son had to wife; their son was Bolle. The second of Thord&apos;s daughters was Her-dis, whom Atle the Strong had to wife. Thor-grima Galley-cheek was the third; Arn-borg the fourth; As-gerd the fifth; An-leva the sixth; Thor-rid the seventh; Frid-gerd of Hwam the eighth.

<p n=11.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-laf the Big</hi> dwelt in Hrod-laf&apos;s-dale, as was before written, <pb id=pb144a n=144>before Thord drove him out of the north for the slaying of Ord Unason; then he went into Water-dale.

<p n=11.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Frid-laf</hi> was the name of a man that was Geatish on his father&apos;s side, but Bryn-gerd was the name of his mother, and she was a Flemish woman. Frid-laf took in settlement all Plain-lithe and Frid-laf-dale, between Frid-laf-dale-river and Staff, and dwelt at Holt. His son was Theod-here, the father of Are and of Bryn-gerd, the mother of Stan o&apos; Tongue.

<p n=11.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Floke</hi>, the son of Wil-gerd, the daughter of Haurd-Care, journeyed to Iceland, and took in settlement Floke-dale, between Floke-dale-river and Reek-hill. He dwelt at Moe. Floke had to wife Groa, the sister of Thord o&apos; Head. Their son was Ord-laf Staff, that dwelt at Staff-holt, and had a feud with the Shelty-sons. Floke&apos;s daughter was Theod-gerd, the mother of Codran, the father of Theod-gerd, the mother of Codran, the father of Care of Water-dale.


<p n=12.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thord Knop</hi> was the name of a man, Sognish [<hi>or</hi> Swedish] by race, the sister&apos;s son [Sison] of Beorn o&apos; the Howe; and another son of theirs was named Nave-Helge. They both journeyed to Iceland in the same ship, and put in at Hay-ness. Thord took in settlement land up from Stifle to Tongue-river, and dwelt at Knop-stead. He had to wife Asa, daughter of Leot-wolf gode. Their son was Hafr [He-goat], who had to wife Thu-rid, the daughter of Thor-kell of God-dales. Their son was Thor-arin, the father of Un-fey.

<p n=12.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Nave-Helge</hi> took land in settlement eastward up from Hay-ness to Floke-dale-river, below Bard, and up to Tongue-river, and dwelt at <pb id=pb145a n=145>Grindle. He had to wife Gro [Gruoch] the Second-sighted. Their children were these: Thor-wolf Carle-head; and the second Arnor [Arun, Orran?], that fought with Frid-laf at Staff-hill; and Thor-gerd, whom Gar-mund S&aelig;-mund&apos;s son had to wife; and Wolf-hild [S: All-hild], whom Arnor, Skevil&apos;s son, of Gang-pass, had to wife. Their son was Thor-gar the Over-weening, that slew Mar o&apos; the Offerings <hi>that dwelt</hi> at Moe-berg. Thor-wen Blue-cheek was one....

<p n=12.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bard</hi>, a Southreyman, took land in settlement up from Stifle to Slim-dale-river. His son was Hall Slim-daling, the father of Thor-rid, whom Arnor Carling-neb had to wife.

<p n=12.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Brune the White</hi> was the name of a nobleman, the son of Heah-rec the Uplandmen&apos;s earl. He came to Iceland of his own will, and took land in settlement between Slim-dale-river and Wolf-dale. He dwelt at Brune-stead. He had to wife Arn-ora, daughter of Thor-gar the Mad, son of Leod-wolf gode. Their sons were Cetil, and Wolf-hedin, and Thord, whence the <hi rend=sc>Bard-biders</hi> are come.

<p n=12.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wolf the Wicking</hi> and Anlaf Bench came to Iceland in the same ship. Wolf took in settlement Wolf-dale, and dwelt there.

<p n=12.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Anlaf Bench</hi> was the son of Carle of Birch-ey in Haleygo-land. He slew Thore the Black, and was outlawed therefore. Anlaf took in settlement all the dales on the west, and Anlaf&apos;s-frith from the south to match with Thor-mod&apos;s-land; and he dwelt at Quhae-beck. His sons were these: Stan-mod, the father of Beorn, and Grim-wolf, and Arn-ord, the father of Wil-borg, the mother of Carl the Red.

<pb id=pb146a n=146><p n=12.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-mod the Strong</hi> was the name of a Sweenish [Sognish?] man. He slew Gurth, the mother&apos;s father of Scialg [Squint] of Iadar, and was therefore cast out of the land by king Beorn o&apos; Howe. He journeyed to Iceland, and came in his ship to Mast-frith, and sailed up it as far as Thor-mod&apos;s-eyre, and gave the names Mast-frith and Mast-ness to those places accordingly. He took in settlement all Mast-frith, between Wolf-dale and Hwan-dale <hi>or</hi> Angelica-dale. He dwelt on Mast-ness. He had a feud with Anlaf Bench over Hwan-dale, and was the death of seventeen men before he and Anlaf were set at peace with each other, each agreeing to have it summer about. Thor-mod was the son of Harold Wicking. He had to wife Arn-gerd <hi>or</hi> Erne-gerd, the daughter of Scid of Scid-dale. Their sons were these: Arn-gar the Keen, and Narfe, the father of Throwend, the father of Risey-Narfe, and Al-ric that fought at Plain-lithe against Cnor Thord&apos;s son.

<p n=12.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gund-wolf the Old</hi>, the son of Thor-beorn Thud out of Sogn. He slew We-gar the father of We-beorn, the champion of the Sogners, and then went out to Iceland. He took in settlement Anlaf&apos;s-frith eastward to Reek-water, and west to Wo-mull, and dwelt at Gund-wolf&apos;s-river. He had to wife Groa, the daughter of Thor-wald of Hurst. Their sons were Stan-wolf, and Thore, and Thor-grim.


<p n=13.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn</hi> was the name of a nobleman in Geat-land, the son of Hrodwolf-a-River. He had to wife Hlifa, daughter of Hrod-wolf, the son of Ingi-ald, the son of king Frode. Starcad the Old was poet to both of them [Ingi-ald and Frode]. Ey-wind was the name of their son.

<pb id=pb147a n=147><p n=13.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Beorn had a quarrel over a piece of land with Sig-fast, the father-in-law of Sol-were, the king [earl?] of the Geats. Sig-fast gave his daughter in wedlock to Sol-were, and the earl helped Sig-fast so well, that he kept hold of all Beorn&apos;s lands by the strong hand. Then Beorn handselled to his wife Hlifa and his son Ey-wind all his goods in Geat-land, and set out from the east with twelve horses laden with silver; and the night before he left the country he burnt Sig-fast in his house and thirty men with him, and then he journeyed west into Norway with twelve men into Agd to Hwin to Grim the herse, the son of Col-beorn Snib, the brother of Ingi-ald the Trusty, the kinsman of Arin-beorn o&apos; the Friths; and Grim received him very well. Beorn and his companions were with him all the winter; but when the spring was coming on, one night Beorn was aware of a man standing over him with a drawn sword, with which he struck at him, but Beorn caught his hand. This man had taken a fee of Grim to bring him Beorn&apos;s head. Beorn did not slay him. Grim had wished to slay him treacherously to get his money. Wherefore Beorn went away and came to Ondott Crow, the son of Erling Knit, that dwelt at Hwin-frith in Agd. Ondott had to wife Sig-ny, the daughter of Sig-wat of Lithe, out of the east of Wick. Beorn went forth to the west on wicking cruises in the summers, and stayed with Ondott through the winters. At this time Hlifa died in Geat-land, and then Beorn took to wife Helga, Ondott&apos;s sister. Their son was Throwend the Far-sailer. Afterwards Ey-wind came out of the east to his father Beorn; he was the son of Hlifa. He took <pb id=pb148a n=148>over the war-ships of his father, and the way of life he followed, when Beorn gave up going a warring.

<p n=13.2.1>Afterwards Ey-wind took to wife in Ireland R&amacr;forta [.....], the daughter of Cear-val [Cear-bhall]. She gave birth to a boy in the Southreys, and put him out to fosterage there. Two winters later they came back to the Islands [Sodor] to see the boy, and saw a boy there, with fair eyes, but there was no flesh on him, for he was starved; and so they called the boy Helge the Lean. He was afterwards put into fosterage in Ireland. Ey-wind was called the Ost-man <hi>or</hi> East-man, because he came west over sea out of Sweeric [Sweden] in the east.

<p n=13.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Beorn died at the house of Ondott, his brother-in-law, but Grim said that the king ought to take all his inheritance [as <hi>aubaine</hi>], because he was a stranger, and his son was away west over sea. But Ondott kept the inheritance on behalf of Throw-end, his sister&apos;s son.

<p n=13.3.1>Helge was brought up in Ireland. He took to wife Thor-wen Hyrna, daughter of Cetil Flat-neb of the Southreys, and of Yngw-hild, daughter of Cetil Wether of Ring-ric, and they had many children.


<p n=14.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Afterwards Helge</hi> journeyed to Iceland with his wife and children, Hrod-wolf, Ingi-ald, and Ing-wen, whom Heah-mund Hell-skin had to wife, for he came out with Helge. But when Helge gat sight of Iceland, he enquired of Thunder <hi>or</hi> Thor where he should go to land; but the oracle directed him to go to Ey-frith, and enjoined him earnestly neither to go thence to the west nor to the east. Before the frith opened <pb id=pb149a n=149>Hrod-wolf, Helge&apos;s son, asked his father, if Thunder had told him to go to the Dum Sea [the Arctic Ocean] for his winter quarters, whether he would have done as he bade him or not? For the sailors thought it was time to get off the sea, seeing that the summer was far gone.

<p n=14.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Helge came ashore beyond Risey, up in Swarfad-dale. He stayed at Heah-mund-stead the first winter. They got such a hard winter that it was within a little of all their live-stock that they had with them dying. In the spring Helge walked up on to Sun-fell, and saw that it was far blacker [less snow] to look on further up in a frith, which they called Ey-frith, because of the islands that lay out of the mouth of it. After that Helge carried all that he had aboard his ship and put forth, but Heah-mund stayed behind. Helge landed at Galt-hammer, where he put two swine ashore, a boar called Solwe and a sow; they were found three winters later in Solwe-dale, and they were then seventy head of swine. That winter Helge dwelt at Bilds-water; but the next summer he spied out all the country side, and took in settlement all Ey-frith between Mast-ness and Rowan-ness, making a great fire at every river mouth by the sea, and so hallowing to himself all the country side between the rivers.

<p n=14.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> But one winter later Helge flitted his household to Christ-ness, and dwelt there till his death day. He was very mixed in his faith. He put his trust in Christ, and named his homestead after him, but yet he would pray to Thunder on sea voyages, and in hard stresses, and in all <pb id=pb150a n=150>those things that he thought were of most account to him. When Helge was flitting Thorwen Hyrna gave birth to a child at the springs of Ey-frith in Thorwen&apos;s-ey, and there Thor-berg Holm-sun was born.

<p n=14.3.1>After this Helge dealt out land to his sons and sons-in-law.

<p n=14.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> To his son Ingi-ald he gave land up from Upper Thwart-water, east of Ey-frith-water, to Arne-hillock.  Ingi-ald dwelt at Upper Thwart-water, and set up a great temple there. He had to wife Sal-gerd, the daughter of Stan-wolf the Low of Risey, the son of Alwe Bairn-carle. Their son was Ey-wolf, who had to wife As-rid, daughter of Wig-fus of Wors, the son of Wicking Carl. Their sons were Wig-fus, and Slaughter-Glum, and Thor-stan. The son of Slaughter-Glum was Wig-fus, the father of Berg, the father of Stan-unn, the mother of Thor-stan the Wrongeous.

<p n=14.4.1>S: He had to wife Sal-gerd, daughter of Stan-wolf. Their son was Ey-wolf, the father of Slaughter-Glum, and Stan-wolf, the father of Thor-arin the Wicked, and of Arnor the Good, the Red-water-men&apos;s gode.

<p n=14.4.2>After that men took to dwell in the settlement of Helge at his rede <hi>or</hi> counsel.

<p n=14.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Swarfad</hi>, the son of Red Rugg of Neam-dale.  He had to wife Hild, the daughter of Thrain Swart-goblin. Thor-stan came to Iceland, and took in settlement Swarfad-dale by rede <hi>or</hi> counsel of Helge. His children were these: Carle the Red, that dwelt at Carle&apos;s-river, and Gud-run, whom Haf-thor the Wicking had to wife. Their children were Clove and Groa, whom Gris Gledil had to wife.

<pb id=pb151a n=151><p n=14.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Atle Illing</hi>. He slew Haf-thor, and put Carle the Red in irons. Then came Clove upon Atle unawares and slew him, and took Carle out of irons. Clove had to wife Yngw-hild Red-cheek, the daughter of As-gar <hi>or</hi> Os-gar Red-cloak, and the sister of An-laf Sibyl-breaker, and Thor-laf the poet. He cut up of theirs a bag of dye-weeds which they were gathering on his land, whereon Thor-laf made this verse:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>The farmer cut up my bag of dye weeds,
    <l>And Olaf&apos;s strap and coat as well:
    <l>So shall be, ...
    <l>The farmer&apos;s skin hacked about.
</lg>

            <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 361 (corrected).]


<p n=14.6.1>Whence arose the <hi rend=sc>History of the Men of Swarf-dale</hi>.

<p n=14.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Carle</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement all the strands up from Ufse to Migande.

<p n=14.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Heah-mund</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Ha-mund Hell-skin</hi> got all Galman-strand and the land between Swarfad-dale and Harrow-dale, and dwelt where Helge had first dwelt, at the place that is now called Hamund-stead.

<p n=14.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Hamund gave Erne his kinsman, who had taken in settlement Erne-frith, further the land west of Reistar-river. Erne dwelt at Erne-ness. Moreover Hamund sold to Thor-wald all the lands that lie between Reistar-river and Harrow-dale-river. After him Thorwald-dale is named, <hi>and</hi> there he dwelt.

<p n=14.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Helge the Lean then gave Hamund the lands between Marksgill <pb id=pb152a n=152>and Squint-dale-water, and he dwelt at Aspen-hill. Thore was his son, who also dwelt there. He was the father of Thor-wald Crook, the father of Cetil [Cathal], the father of Einar, the father of Thor-stan Wrongeous.

<p n=14.10.1>Thor-wen was the name of the daughter of Erne of Erne&apos;s-ness, whom As-gar Red-cloak had to wife, the son of Her-wolf that took Bride-dale in settlement. As-gar was the brother of Bead-mod Gerpe, the son of Grim-wolf of Agd. The mother of him and As-gar was Helm-gerd, the sister of Brord and Bow. Narfe was yet another son of Erne of Erne&apos;s-ness. He had to wife Wolf-heid, daughter of Ingi-ald, son of Helge the Lean. After him Narfe&apos;s-reef is named. Their son was As-brand, the father of Slate-Narfe.

<p n=14.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> S: Hamund Hell-skin, the son of king Heor, dealt out land to Erne his kinsman, when he came out of the west, for he had taken in settlement Erne-frith, and dwelt at Erne-ness. His daughter was Id-wen, whom As-gar Red-cloak had to wife. The son of Erne was Narfe, after whom Narfe&apos;s-reef is named. He had to wife Wolf-heid, the daughter of Ingi-ald of Peak-fell. Their sons were these: As-brand, the father of Cave-Narfe, and of Ey-wolf, the father of Thor-kell of Hay, and Helge, the father of Grim of Calf-skin.

<p n=14.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Galman</hi> [Irish] was the name of a man that took in settlement Galman&apos;s-strand, between Thor-wald&apos;s-dale-river and Reistar-river. His son was Thor-wald, father of Orm, the father of Thor-wald, the father of Beorn, the father of Thord, the father of Thor-wen, the <pb id=pb153a n=153>mother of Dyr-finna, the mother of Thor-stan Smiths [C: <hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi> 1200], the son of Sceg.

<p n=14.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Helge [Hamund] gave Thor-wald land between Reister-river and Harrow-river; but before he had dwelt at Thor-wald-dale.

<p n=14.14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-laf</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Harrow-river up to Mirk-water. He was the son of Hrap, and dwelt at Old Hayes. His son was Beorn the Wealthy, from whom the <hi rend=sc>Aud-brink-men</hi> are come.

<p n=14.15><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> There was a man named <hi rend=sc>Thord Slitter</hi>. He took in settlement all Harrow-dale up from Mirk-water and down to Drong on the other side. His son was Erne-wolf, that had to wife Yngw-hild All-sister. Their sons were these: Thord and Thor-wend of Christ-ness, and Stan-grim of Cropp.

<p n=14.16><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> Thord Slitter gave part of his settlement to Thor-gar Scolm, his kinsman. His son was Thor-elf the Strong, that dwelt at Mirk-water.

<p n=14.17><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thore Goblin-crusher</hi> was the name of a man that was born in Aumd in Haleygo-land. He became a banished man before earl Hacon Gritgardsson, and therefore he came to Iceland. He took in settlement all Oxen-dale, and dwelt at Water-river <hi>or</hi> Mere-river. His son was Stan-rod the Strong, who healed many men whom evil wights [demons and witches] had wrought harm to.

<p n=14.18><ab type=parNum>18.</ab> Gar-hild was the name of a witch-woman that wrought evil. Men with second-sight saw Stan-rod come upon her unawares; but she turned herself into the shape of an ox-skin full of water. Stan-rod was <pb id=pb154a n=154>an iron-smith, and he had a great gad <hi>or</hi> bar of iron in his hand. Of their meeting these verses were spoken:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>The fork <hi>or</hi> bar hammers the swollen water-bag;
    <l>The iron gad plays on the old wife&apos;s ribs at Shelty Eyre.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 328. <hi>The verses have been altered by a later editor.</hi>]


<p rend="noindent" n=14.18.1>The daughter of Stan-rod was Thor-leot, whom Thor-ward of Christ-ness had to wife.

<p n=14.19><ab type=parNum>19.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ead-wolf</hi> was the name of a man that came from Iadar to Iceland, and took in settlement Harrow-dale down from Thwart-water to Bægis-water, and dwelt at South Bægis-water. He had to wife Thor-hild, the daughter of Helge the Lean. Their daughter <hi>was</hi> Yngw-hild, whom Thor-ord Helm had to wife, the father of Arn-leot, the father of Hall-dor, the father of Einar, the father of Ior-wen, the mother of Hall.

<p n=14.20><ab type=parNum>20.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-stan</hi>, the son of Red-wolf [S: Rand-wolf], the son of Oxen-Thore, took land in settlement from Bægis-water to Crowling-lithe, and dwelt at Lone <hi>or</hi> Wash. His son was Gund-stan, who had to wife Hlifa, daughter of Hedin of Meola [isle in Norway]. Their children were these: Hall-dora, whom Slaughter Glum had to wife, and Thor-grim, and Grim Eyre-leg.

<p n=14.21><ab type=parNum>21.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind Cock</hi> was the name of a man of birth. He came to Iceland late in the time of the settlement.  He owned a ship [as partner] with Thor-grim, Hlifa&apos;s son.  He was the kinsman of the Ondott&apos;s sons. They gave him land, and he dwelt at Cock-town, and was called Town-cock,&mdash;the place that is now called Mere-boll. He <pb id=pb155a n=155>had to wife Thor-wen, the daughter of Oxen-Thore. His son was Snorre, the Lithe-men&apos;s <hi>gode</hi>.


<p n=15.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Aun-dott</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Ondott Crow</hi>, he who was spoken of before, became a mighty man, and when Beorn his brother-in-law died, Grim the herse said that all his wealth was forfeited to the king, because he was an outlander <hi>or</hi> alien, and his sons were west over sea&mdash;Ey-wind the East-man and Throwend the Far-sailer. But Ondott kept hold of the heritage for Throwend and his sister&apos;s son. But when Throwend heard of the death of his father, he sailed out of the Southreys, the voyage that he got the name of the Far-sailer [Fast-sailer] by, and took over his father&apos;s heritage, and then sailed to Iceland, as shall be afterwards told.

<p n=15.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> The homestead of Ondott stood near the sea, and a short way from Ingi-ald&apos;s-by; Grim dwelt a short way from Ingi-ald. And one night as Ondott was cutting wood in the shaw for brewing a little before Yule, Grim came upon him and slew him in the king&apos;s behalf, and four more men with him. That same night Signy put on board a long-ship <hi>or</hi> war-ship all Ondott&apos;s chattels, and set forth with her two little sons, As-mund <hi>or</hi> Os-mund and As-grim <hi>or</hi> Os-grim, and all her house-carles, to Sigh-wat her father; but her sons she sent to Hedin, her foster-son, in Soken-dale, to be in hiding there, for she knew that Grim would seek after them. And he came with two ships east of Sailor&apos;s Naze and ransacked her ship, but could not find the boys. Stan-here was the name of the man that took the boys to Hedin. Grim set forth <pb id=pb156a n=156>to seek them there; and he and his men came upon Erne-wolf, Hedin&apos;s son, in the wood. He feigned himself mad, and made as if he had the falling sickness, for he did not wish to say [where the boys were]. And afterwards they lit upon Hedin&apos;s second son, whose name was Wolf, keeping his father&apos;s sheep. He took half a hundred of silver from Grim to say where the boys were; but he brought his father the money, and told him all about it, and did not go back to Grim. Grim did not dare to go and seek Hedin at home, for he suspected the faith of the boy, so he went home. But the boys were in the underground house at Hedin&apos;s till the harvest came, then they stole away, wishing to get to Sigh-wat, their mother&apos;s father. But they went astray as to which hand the sea lay. The frost was very hard, and they were shoeless, but they got to a homestead. Said As-mund, &lsquo;Knowest this house, brother?&rsquo; &lsquo;Nay,&rsquo; said As-grim; but as they got nearer, they saw the bed-room that their father had had built, and knew it again. They thought they were ill-come there, and turned to go to Ingi-ald the Trusty&apos;s. It was then Yule-even. They hid themselves there. Gyda [the house-wife] found them out first, and she called to Ingi-ald&apos;s mind the friendship between him and Ondott, and begged him to receive them. They were there that winter, but they did not go by their own names.

<p n=15.2.1>But the next summer Grim made a feast for Ead-wine the earl of king Harold. And the night that he had been at the ale-brewing, the sons of Ondott burnt him in his house. Then they took Ingi-ald&apos;s boat, and rowed away to the islands that lay in the frith of Hwin, having first told Gyda and Ingi-ald what they had done. Ingi-ald bade <pb id=pb157a n=157>them be off, and never come into his sight again. They pulled their boat ashore, and went to the houses [on the island]. Then they heard men talking inside the houses that night who had been on the cruise with earl Ead-wine. They walked down to their boat as soon as they had heard this, and rowed to the mainland. There they saw the earl&apos;s smack lying afloat under awnings. They walked to the hall where they were told the earl was sleeping; but his men were on board, and two men were keeping watch and ward over him. As-mund gripped hold of them both and held them, and As-grim walked into the hall, and put the point of his spear to the earl&apos;s breast, and bade him pay him his father&apos;s were-gild. Then the earl gave him up three gold rings and a finely woven mantle; but As-grim gave him a name in return, and called him Ead-wine Goat [= hare <hi>or</hi> craven]. Then Ondott&apos;s sons ran down to their boat, and rowed away out to sea down the frith, and into a current <hi>or</hi> race that there was in the frith, and then they spread out on the sea the mantle; for they could see that the earl&apos;s men were rowing after them, and that they could not get away. The earl&apos;s men found the mantle, and thought that they must be drowned.

<p n=15.2.2>But the sons of Ondott went to Surn-dale, northward round Stim, to Eiric Aul-fus, a thegen <hi>or</hi> baron. There dwelt also Hall-stan Stred, another thegen <hi>or</hi> baron. They were keeping the Yule-drink [by turn], and Eiric kept good cheer; but Hall-stan struck him with a horn when they were at his house. Eiric now went home, but Hall-stan was sitting still afterwards. As-grim came into his house alone, and gave <pb id=pb158a n=158>Hall-stan a great wound, and then sprang up and was off to the wood, and Hall-stan&apos;s men after him. As-grim betook him to swimming a river in the frost, but Hall-stan&apos;s house-carles wounded him sore shooting at him. He got to an old woman&apos;s in the wood. She cut open a calf and laid its guts on As-grim, so that they that came into the house thought that it was his entrails that lay there, and that he was a dead man. They turned home again, but the old woman healed him in hiding in an underground house.

<p n=15.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> That summer As-mund went to Iceland, for he thought that his brother As-gar was dead; and Helge the Lean gave him land to take in settlement at Crowling-lithe.

<p n=15.3.1>There came out with him Bead-wolf of Hwin. His sons were Sceg and Thore Cone-mull. Afterwards Bead-wolf had to wife Thor-borg Holm-sun. Their daughter was Thor-gerd, whom As-mund, Ondott&apos;s son, had to wife.

<p n=15.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hall-stan died that same spring of his wound. Then Eiric Aulfus gave As-grim a long ship with thirty benches told, and he took to warring, and held that way of life some summers. King Harold sent Thor-gar, Grim&apos;s sister&apos;s son, to fetch him As-grim&apos;s head and gave him two war-ships. He could not light upon him. And then he set out to Iceland being minded to slay As-mund, and came to Eyre and stayed through the winter in Hwin-ware-dale. The summer after As-grim came out to Eyre. He owned half a ship with Thore Cone-mull, and there were four-and-twenty aboard of her. As-grim and Thore disagreed, and As-grim bought the other&apos;s share for himself. Thore rode <pb id=pb159a n=159>north with half the crew, and came to Hwin-ware-dale, and told of As-grim&apos;s coming, and then rode home. Half a month later As-grim rode forth from his ship, and took guesting at Throwend the Far-sailer in Throwend-holt. He bade him to stay the winter through with him, and told him that it would not be without jeopardy that he would ride north by reason of Thor-gar. Nevertheless As-grim set forth northward with twelve men, and they had twelve pack-horses, and mails on them. The day they rode over the Keel, As-grim bade his men ride in mail with their cowls outside, and if they lit upon Thor-gar to tell him that it was Thore Cone-mull that was on his way, but that As-grim was gone north. They stayed two nights at Thor-gar&apos;s, for he thought it was Thore and his men. He had thirty men there. He rode on the way with them; and when he came home he laid him down to sleep, and dreamed that a woman came to him and told him what guests had been staying with him. Then he and his men rode after them; but As-grim waited for him at the settlement of We-kell&apos;s Barrow, and thither came As-mund his brother to meet him with forty men, and he made peace between Thor-gar and As-grim. A few winters later As-grim went abroad, and took to wife Gar-rid, the daughter of Eiric Aul-fus. Their son was Ellida-Grim. They came to Iceland afterwards, and Helge the Lean gave As-grim a settlement in Crowling-lithe, and the two brothers owned all the lithe; and it was called after them Crowling-lithe, because they were the sons of Ondott Crow. As-mund dwelt at South Glas-water and As-grim at North Glas-water. <pb id=pb160a n=160>As-grim&apos;s son was Ellida-Grim, the father of As-grim, the father of Sig-fus, the father of Thor-gerd, the mother of Grim, the father of Swerting.

<p n=15.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Helge the Lean gave <hi rend=sc>Ha-mund</hi>, his son-in-law, land between Mark-gill and Squint-dale-river, and he dwelt at South Aspen-hill. His son was Thore, who dwelt there. He had to wife Thor-dis, Cathal&apos;s daughter. Their son was Thor-arin that dwelt at North Aspen-hill, and Thor-wald Crook of Ground, but Thor-grim of Madder-field was not the son of Thor-dis, and Wig-dis was their daughter.

<p n=15.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Helge gave Thora, his daughter, in wedlock to Gun-here, the son of <hi rend=sc>Wolf-leot</hi> that brought the constitution out hither, and <hi>he gave Gun-here also</hi> land up from Squint-dale-river to Neck. Gun-here dwelt at Deep-dale. Their children were these: Thor-stan and Cetil, and Stan-wolf <hi>or</hi> Stan-mod, and Yngw-hild, and Thor-laug.

<p n=15.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Helge gave Helga, his daughter, to <hi rend=sc>Ead-wine Rotin</hi>, the son of Thor-wolf Butter, the son of Thor-stan Scrofe, the son of Grim Camban, and land up from Neck to Wilding-dale. He dwelt at Sowerby. Their children were these: Einar, father of Ey-wolf, father of Gudmund the Mighty, and Wig-dis, mother of Hall the White, the father of Orm, the father of Hall, the father of Thor-gar.

<p n=15.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hamund Hell-skin</hi> took to wife Helga, daughter of Helge, after the death of Ing-wen her sister, and their daughter was Yngw-hild All-men&apos;s sister, whom Erne-wolf had to wife.

<pb id=pb161a n=161><p n=15.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Helge gave his son <hi rend=sc>Hrod-wolf</hi> all the lands from the east of Ey-frith from Erne&apos;s-hillock up, and he dwelt at Peak-fell, and set up a great temple there. He had to wife Thor-orna, the daughter of Thrond Slim-leg. Their children were these: Haf-lide the Open-handed, and Wal-theow, Wid-here, and Grane, Bead-were, and Ingi-ald, Ey-wind, Gud-laug, whom Thor-kell the Black had to wife. Wal-theow was the father of Helge, the father of Thore, the father of Arn-thor, the father of Thor-rid.

<p n=15.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Helge gave his daughter Hlifa to Thor-gar, the son of Thord Bialca, and land west from Thwart-water to Ward-geow <hi>or</hi> Ward-rift. They dwelt at Fish-beck. Their children were these: Thord and Helga.

<p n=15.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Scage</hi>, Scofte&apos;s son, was the name of a nobleman in More. He was at feud with Ey-stan Glumra, and therefore came to Iceland. He took in settlement by counsel of Helge the northern [eastern] strand of Ey-frith, west from Ward-rift to Tinder-dale-water, and dwelt at Mast-wick. His son was Thor-beorn, the father of Hedin the Mild, who built Swal-bard [Cold-beard] sixteen winters before Christendom. He had to wife Regin-hild, the daughter of Ey-wolf Walgerdsson.


<p n=16.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thore Snip</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Cetil Brimil <hi>or</hi> Surf-seal, the son of Erne-wolf, the son of Beorn-wolf, the son of Grim Hairy-cheek. Cetil Brimil had to wife Ior-wen, the daughter of Thorg-ny the Lawman of Swee-ric [Sweden]. Cetil Brimil was a great wicking. He went to Shet-land with Turf-Einar. Geat was the name of his shipmate. But as he was getting ready to go to Iceland, and as <pb id=pb162a n=162>they were putting out to sea, wickings came upon them wishing to rob them; but Geat struck their forecastle man dead with the tiller, and with that the wickings made off. Ever after Geat was called Tiller-geat. He and Thore sailed to Iceland, and came in their ship to the mouth Quaking-fleet. Thori took in settlement Cold-cheek between Sceg-berg and Light-water-pass. He was not pleased with, <hi>or</hi> could not rest in this place, and went away, and then he quoth:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Cold-cheek, there thou liest; I cannot find any pleasure in thee.
    <l>But, Tiller-Gaut, let us hence hale away.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 361 (corrected).]


<p n=16.1.1>Then he took in settlement all Tinder-dale to Un-dale, and dwelt at Lund [Grove]. He sacrificed to the grove. Worm Mail-back was the son of Snip, the father of Hlenne the Old and Thor-kell the Black of Hledra-garth [Tent-garth], who had to wife Gud-laug, Hrod-wolf&apos;s daughter. Their son was Ongul the Black, and Raven, the father of Thord of Stock-lathe, and of Gud-rid, whom Thor-gar, gode <hi>or</hi> priest of Light-water, had to wife.

<p n=16.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thengil the Far-sailer</hi> went from Halogo-land to Iceland. He took land in settlement, at the rede of Helge, west from Tinder-water to Pine-wick, and dwelt at Head. His sons were these: Wer-mund, the father of As-wolf of Head, and Hall-stan, who quoth these verses as he sailed home from sea and heard news of the death of his father:&mdash;


<pb id=pb163a n=163><lg>
    <l>The headlands droop for Thengil&apos;s death,
    <l>The hill-sides laugh to welcome Hallstan [the heir].
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 361.]


<p n=16.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-mod</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Pine-wick and Whale-lair, and all the strand west to Thor-gar&apos;s-frith. His son was Snert, whence the <hi rend=sc>Snertlings</hi> are come from.

<p n=16.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-gar</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Thor-gar&apos;s-frith and Whale-mere-frith.

<p n=16.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lodin Angle</hi> was the name of a man that was born in Angley in Haloga-land. He came to Iceland because of the oppression of earl Hacon Grit-gardsson. King Sig-here had dwelt in Angley at Steig, and there is Signy&apos;s well and Hag-bard&apos;s-holm. Lodin Angle died at sea; but Ey-wind his son took in settlement Flatey-dale up to the Gund-stones, and sacrificed there. There lies Un-deal between his settlement and Thore Snip&apos;s. As-beorn Drop-beam was the son of Ey-wind, the father of Fin-bow the Strong.


<p n=17.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bard</hi>, the son of Beorn of Heyang, came in his ship to the mouth of Quaking-fleet, and took in settlement all Bard-dale up from Calf-borg-water and Ey-dale-water, and dwelt at Grove-brink for some while. Now he marked that the land winds were warmer than the sea winds, and thereby thought that there must be a better choice of land to the south of the Heath. He sent his sons south in Goe [10 Feb.&ndash;10 Mar.]. They found scouring rush and other growth. But the second spring after Bard put a sled to every living thing that could walk, and made <pb id=pb164a n=164>each drag his own fodder, and all his chattels. He went by a path that was afterwards called Bard&apos;s-gate over the pass of Good Hope, and then took in settlement Fleet-wharf, and dwelt at Peaks. He was called Bard o&apos; the Peak. He had many children.

<p n=17.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> His son was Sig-mund, the father of Thor-stan, that had to wife Asa, the daughter of Hrod-wolf Red-beard. Their daughter was Thor-wen, whom Thor-kell Laf had to wife, and their son was Thor-gar-gode of Light-water.

<p>Another son of Bard&apos;s was Thor-stan, father of Thore, that fought at Fitia with king Hacon, and cut a slit in an ox-hide, and had that for armour, wherefore he was called Leather-neck. He had to wife Fior-leva [<hi>or</hi> Frey-leva], daughter of Ey-wind. Their sons were these: Ha-ward of Fell&apos;s-mull, and Here-wolf of Midge-mere, and Cetil of House-wick, and We-mund Quiver that had to wife Hall-dora, the daughter of Thor-kell the Black, and As-kell and Neck that dwelt at Helga-stead.

<p n=17.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cempe Grim</hi>, <hi>or</hi> Champion-Grim, came to Iceland from the Southreys, and tossed about on the sea all the summer, and ran his ship ashore at the mouth of Quaking-fleet. He took in settlement Cold-cheek for the second time, and afterwards sold [parts of] it to divers men. His daughter was Arn-borg, whom As-wolf of Head had to wife.

<p n=17.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-fin Moon</hi>, the son of As-kell-Tiorwe.  He took land in settlement from under Ey-dale-water to Land-mete, and some part beyond Light-water-pass, and dwelt at Ax-water.


<pb id=pb165a n=165><p n=18.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 1.</ab> S: <hi rend=sc>Thore</hi>, the son of Grim Gray-cloak&apos;s-mule of Rogaland. He took in settlement Light-water-pass. His son was Thor-kell Laf the Tall, the father of Thor-gar-gode. Thor-gar first had to wife Gud-rid, the daughter of Thor-kell the Black. Their sons were Thor-kell Hake and Haus-Coll, Tiorwe and Coil-Grim, Thor-stan and Thor-ward, and a daughter Sig-rid. Afterwards he had to wife Sal-gerd [S: Alf-gerd], the daughter of Arn-gar the Eastron. He had to wife also [third wife] Thor-katla, the daughter of Coll-a-Dale. His sons by these wives were Thor-grim, Oht-here, Thor-gils. These were bastards: Thor-grim and Fin the Dream-teller. His mother was Lec-ny, a stranger woman.

<p n=18.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hedin</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Haus-Coll</hi>, the sons of Thor-stan Goblin, came to Iceland, and took land in settlement inward of Tongue-heath. Hedin dwelt at Hedin-head, and had to wife Gud-run. Their sons were Arn-mod, whom Ketil, Fior-leva&apos;s son, had to wife; but Gud-run was their daughter, whom Hrod-wolf of Peak-fell had to wife.

<p>Haus-Coll took all the lands east of Lax-water, and dwelt at Pass-wick. After him Haus-Coll&apos;s-mere is called, because he was drowned there. In their settlement is House-wick, where Gard-here had a winter abode. The son of Haus-Coll was Hrod-wald, who had to wife Egi-leva, daughter of Hrod-wolf, son of Helge the Lean.

<p n=18.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>West-mere</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Wolf</hi>, sworn brethren, came in one ship to Iceland, and took in settlement all Reek-dale, west of Lax-water up to <pb id=pb166a n=166>West-mere-water. West-mere had to wife Gud-laug. Wolf dwelt below Scrat-fell. [He had to wife ... ] His son was Gar-wolf, that had to wife Wig-dis, the daughter of Conall, after Thor-grim. Their son was Hall.


<p n=19.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>19.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Head</hi> was the name of a man that was a <hi>herse</hi> in Hausda-land. His sons were these: <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Cetil</hi> the Haur-dish. Ey-wind went to Iceland after his father&apos;s death; but Cetil asked him to take land in settlement for both of them, in case he should get in his head to come later. Cetil beached his ship in House-wick, and took in settlement Reek-dale up from West-mere-water, and dwelt at Helge-stead, and there is his barrow. His son was As-kell, that got his death-wound at Ey-frith-water over against Cropp, when Stan-grim was about revenging the blow with the <hi>singed</hi> sheep&apos;s-head. As-kell had to wife the daughter of Greniad. Their son was Slaughter-Scuta. Fior-leva was the name of the daughter of Ey-wind, whom Thore Leather-neck had to wife.

<p n=19.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Night-farer, that had come out with Gard-here, had owned Reek-dale before, and had marked the trees. But Ey-wind drove him away, and let him have Natt-fare-wick.

<p n=19.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Cetil, his [Eywind&apos;s] brother, dwelt at Einar-stead. His son was Conall, that had to wife Ord-ny, Einar&apos;s daughter, the sister of Ey-wolf Walgerdsson; their son was Einar. Thord was another son of Conall. He was the father of Sock of Broad-mire, the father of Conall.

<p n=19.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> [Double text.] <hi rend=sc>Cetil</hi> came out to Iceland at the message of Ey-wind. <pb id=pb167a n=167>He dwelt at Einar-stead. His son was Conall, and [also] Thor-stan, the son of Einar, that dwelt there afterwards. Ey-wind&apos;s son was As-kell <hi>or</hi> Cetil gode, that had to wife the daughter of Greniad. Their sons were Thor-stan and Slaughter-Scuta. Ey-wind&apos;s daughter was Fior-leva. Conall had to wife Ord-ny, the daughter of Einar, sister of Ey-wolf Walgerdsson. Their children were these: Einar, that had six sons, and a daughter Thor-ney, whom Stan-wolf, Mar&apos;s son, had to wife, and another Ey-dis, whom Thor-stan the priest had to wife out of As-beorn-wick. Thord, Conall&apos;s son, was the father of Socka of Broad-mire, the father of Conall. The daughter of Conall was Wig-dis, whom Thor-grim, the son of Thor-beorn-shaw, had to wife, and their son was Thor-laf, Gar-wolf&apos;s step-son.

<p n=19.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Greniad</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Hrapp, the brother of Gar-laf. He took in settlement Thawing-dale and Cran-heath, below Thor-gerd&apos;s-fell and Lax-water-dale. He dwelt at Greniad-stead. He had to wife Thor-gerd, the daughter of Helge-steed. Their son was Thor-gills Wa-mull, the father of Ean-wend.


<p n=20.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>20.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bead-wolf</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Grim [Orm], Grim-wolf&apos;s son of Agd, the brother of Bead-mod. He had to wife Thor-unn, the daughter of Thor-wolf the historian. Their son was Sceg. They [all] went forth to Iceland, and ran their ship ashore on Tior-ness, and stayed at Bead-wolf&apos;s-cote the first winter. He took in settlement all Tior-ness between Tongue-water and the Mouth. Afterwards <pb id=pb168a n=168>Bead-wolf took to wife Thor-borg Haulm-sun, the daughter of Helge the Lean. Their daughter was Thor-gerd, whom As-mund, Ondott&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son was Thor-laf, the father of Thu-rid, whom Leot o&apos; Field had to wife.

<p n=20.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sceg</hi>, Bead-wolf&apos;s son, took in settlement Well-wharf up to Well-ness, and dwelt at Mickle-garth. He had to wife Helga, the daughter of Thor-gar of Fish-beck. Their son was Thore, a great traveller. He had a cog <hi>or</hi> merchantman built at Frith of Sogn, which bishop Sig-rod the Mighty, who was with king Anlaf Tryggwason, hallowed. Moreover he baptized Thore. Out of this cog the door-posts were made which stood before the doors at Mickle-garth long afterwards, and they could foretell the weather very well until the days of bishop Brand. Worm was the son of Thore, whom Grette, As-mund&apos;s son, murdered. Upon Thore Grette made these verses:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>I shall not ride to meet the great companies of Thore:
    <l>My way leads to Lund. I mean to save my head.
</lg>

            <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 114.]


<p n=20.2.1>An was the name of the son of Thore. [He was] the father of Erne.

<p n=20.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Mane</hi> [Moon] was the name of a man. He was born in Omd in Haloga-land, and came out to Iceland, and ran ashore on Tior-ness, and dwelt at Moon-river some winters. Then Bead-wolf drove him away thence, and then he took in settlement land below Calf-borg-river, between Fleet and Red-scrape <hi>or</hi> slip, and dwelt at Moon-fell. His son was Cetil, that had to wife Weoh-dis, daughter of Thor-brand, that bought <pb id=pb169a n=169>Red-slip-land of Moon. His daughter was Dalla, the sister of Thor-gar, Galti&apos;s son. Thor-wald Sholtoson had her to wife.

<p n=20.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Leot the Unwashed</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Well-wharf up from Well-ness. His son was Gris, the father of Galte [Boar] of Ridge. He was a wise man and a great fighter.

<p n=20.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ean-wend</hi> took in settlement all Well-wharf up [in] from Well-ness, and dwelt at Ridge. He was the son of Blaeng, Soti&apos;s son, the brother of Balci of Red-frith. The daughter of Ean-wend was Thor-borg, whom Hall-gils, Thor-brand&apos;s son of Red-slip, had to wife.


<p n=21.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>21.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan</hi>, the son of Sig-mund, Bard o&apos; Peak&apos;s son, dwelt first at Midge-mere. His son was Thor-grim, the father of Arnor of Reek-lithe, that had to wife Thor-katla, the daughter of Bead-were, the son of Hrod-wolf of Peak-fell. Their son was Bead-were.

<p n=21.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-kell the Tall</hi> came young to Iceland, and first dwelt at Green-mere that came out of Midge-mere. His son was Sig-mund, that had to wife Wig-dis, the daughter of Thore of Aspen-hill. Glum slew him in the field <hi>which was called</hi> Never-fail. The daughter of Thor-kell was Arn-dis, whom Wig-fus, the brother of Slaughter Glum, had to wife. Thor-kell begat a son in his old age that was called Day, the father of Thor-arin, that had to wife Yngw-hild, the daughter of Hall o&apos; Side, after Ey-wolf the Halt had had her to wife.

<p n=21.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gare</hi> was the name of a man that first dwelt south of Midge-mere <pb id=pb170a n=170>at Gare-stead. His son was Glum the poet, and [also] Thor-kell. Gare and his sons fought against Thor-gar Hewn-cheek, and slew his son Thor-stan; and for this manslaughter they were driven north out of that country. Gare sat still in the winter at Gare-stead hard by Cub-mere. Afterwards they went to Broad-frith, and dwelt at Gare&apos;s-dale in Crook-frith. Glum took to wife Ing-wen, daughter of Thor-wolf, We-laf&apos;s son. Their children were these: Thord, that had to wife God-run, Os-wif&apos;s daughter, and Thor-gard, whom Thor-arin, the son of Ingi-ald, the son of Helga Stan-here, had to wife.


<p n=22.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>22.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Earl Turf-einar</hi> begat a daughter in his youth, whose name was Thor-dis. Earl Regin-wald brought her up, and gave her in wedlock to Thor-gar Cloven-foot. Their son was Einar. He went to the Orkneys to see his kinsmen, but they would not receive him as their kinsman. Then Einar bought a ship and sailed to Iceland with two brethren, Westman [Irishman] and We-mund. They sailed north about the land, and went into the friths round Plain. They planted an ax in Reister-peak, and called it Ax-frith. They set up an erne <hi>or</hi> eagle towards the west, and called it Erne-tump; and in the third place they set up a cross, and called it Cross-ridge, and then they hallowed to themselves all Ax-frith.

<p>Einar&apos;s children were these: Ey-wolf, whom Galte, the son of Gris, slew; and Leot, the mother of Hrode the Sharp, who avenged Ey-wolf and slew Galte. The sons of Glire Hall, Brand and Berg, were the sons of Leot&apos;s daughter. They fell in Bead-were&apos;s-dale.

<pb id=pb171a n=171><p n=22.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Reist</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Bearney-Cetil and Hild, the sister of Cetil Thistle, the father of Arn-stan gode. He took land in settlement between Reist-peak and Red-peak, and dwelt at Lear-haven.

<p n=22.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Arn-gar</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Erne-gar</hi> was the name of a man that took all the plain between Ha-were&apos;s-wash and Swegenungs-wick. His children were these: Thor-gils and Ord <hi>or</hi> Orde, and Thor-rid, whom Stan-wolf of Steer-water-dale had to wife.

<p n=22.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ord</hi> was wont to sit by the fireside [ingle side] in his youth, and to get up late, and was called Coal-biter. Arn-gar and Thor-gils went forth from their home in a snowstorm to walk and seek their sheep, and never came back again. A white bear slew them both, Arn-gar and Thor-gils. Ord went forth to seek them, and the bear was by them, and sucking their blood. Ord slew the bear, and ate it all, saying, that he avenged his father when he slew the bear, and his brother when he ate it. After this Ord was wicked and ill to deal with, and was so very skin-strong [lycanthropic] that he walked from home out of Lava-haven in the evening, and the morning after came to Steer-water-dale to the help of his sister, when the Steer-dale-men were about to stone her for witchcraft, and because she was possessed with a fiend.

<p n=22.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Swainung</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Swegenung</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Coll</hi> took in settlement the bays that are called after them&mdash;Swegenungs-wick and Coll-wick.

<p n=22.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil Thistle</hi> was the name of a man, wicked and ill to deal with. He took in settlement Thistle&apos;s-frith, between Hounds-ness and <pb id=pb172a n=172>Sheep-ness. His son was Sig-mund, that took in settlement at Snow-fells-ness. He was the father of Bath-brink Einar.

<p>Now are written the Settlements in Northmen Quarter.

</div3>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 lang=is id=lib4 n=IV rend="align-with(en.lib4)">
<head>LIB. IV.</head>

<p n=0><anchor id=a172.4>Nú hefer upp Land-n&aoacute;m í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge: ok segja menn <anchor id=a172.5>svá, at þesse fiórðongr hafe fyrst albygðr veret á Íslande<note place=apparatus id=an172.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Nú hefer ... Íslande]</ab> <foreign lang=en-UK>S inscribes it thus&mdash;</foreign>Þesser menn hafa land numet í Austfirðinga fiórðunge er nú munu upp talðer; ok ferr hvat af hende norðan til fiórðunga mótz, frá Langanese á Sól-heima-sand. Ok er þat sogn manna, at þessa fiórðungr hafe fyrst albygðr orðet. <foreign lang=en-UK>These men have taken and settled land in the East-frith-folk Quarter, that shall now be told: running point for point from the north to the (southern) boundary or quarter from Langness to Sunhamsand; and it is the saying of men that this quarter was the first fully peopled.</foreign></note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a172.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gunnolfr Croppa</hi> hét maðr, son Þóres Hauk&shy;nefs, <anchor id=a172.7>hersis. Hann nam Gunnolfs-vík, ok Gunnolfs-fell, <anchor id=a172.8>ok Langa-nes allt fyr útan Helkundo-heiðe; ok bió í Fagra-vík: <anchor id=a172.9>hans son vas Skúle Herkja, faðer Geirlaugar<note place=apparatus id=an172.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>faðer Geirl.]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a172.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Finne hét maðr, es nam Finna-fi&aolig;rð, ok Við-fi&aolig;rð<note place=apparatus id=an172.5><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Við-fi&aolig;rð]</ab> add. S.</note>: hans son<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a172.11>vas Þórarenn, faðer Sigurðar, f&aolig;ðor Gliro-Halla.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a172.12><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hroðgeirr enn Hvíte, Hrapps son, nam Sand-vík fyr norðan <anchor id=a172.13>Digra-nes, allt til Viðfiarðar, ok bió á Skeggja-st&aolig;ðom: hans <anchor id=a172.14>dótter vas Ingebi&aolig;rg, es átte Þórsteinn enn Hvíte.

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a172.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Alrekr vas bróðer Hroðgeirs, es út kom með hónom; hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a172.16>vas faðer Liótolfs Goða í Svarfaðar-dale.


<p n=2.1><anchor id=a172.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eyvinðr Vápne</hi>, ok Refr enn Rauðe, syner Þórsteins <anchor id=a172.18>Þiocko-beins, fór<hi>o</hi> til Íslannz or Þróndheime af <pb id=pb173 n=173><note place=margin>[239: iv. 1.]</note> <anchor id=a173.1>Strind; þvi at þeir urðo ósátter við Harald konung; ok hafðe sítt <anchor id=a173.2>skip hvárr þeirra. Refr varð aftr-reka; ok lét Haraldr konungr <anchor id=a173.3>drepa hann; en Eyvindr kom í Vápna-fi&aolig;rð, ok nam fi&aolig;rðenn <anchor id=a173.4>allan fyr vestan Vestra-dals-&aoacute;; ok bió í Crossa-vík-enne-iðre. <anchor id=a173.5>Hans son vas Þórbi&aolig;rn.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a173.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Steinbi&aolig;rn Cortr hét son Refs ens Rauða. Hann fór til <anchor id=a173.7>Íslannz, ok kom í Vápna-fi&aolig;rð. Eyvindr, f&aolig;ðor-bróðer hans, gaf <anchor id=a173.8>hónom land allt miðle Vápna-fiarðar-ár ok Vestra-dals-ár: hann <anchor id=a173.9>bió at Hofe. Hans syner vóro þeir Þórmóðr Sticku-blígr<note place=apparatus id=an173.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Stiku-, S.</note>, es bió í <anchor id=a173.10>Sunnu-dale: annarr Refr á Refs-st&aolig;ðom: Þriðe Egill á Egils-st&aolig;ðom,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a173.11>faðer Þórarens. ok Þrastar, ok Hallbiarnar; ok Hallfríðar, <anchor id=a173.12>es átte Þórkell Geitis son.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a173.13><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hroaldr Biola<hi>n</hi><note place=apparatus id=an173.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Biola, S, H.</note> vas fóst-bróðer Eyvindar Vápna. Hann nam <anchor id=a173.14>land fyr vestan Vestra-dals-&aoacute;, dalenn halfan, ok Selár-dal allan út <anchor id=a173.15>(til) Digra-ness. Hann bió á Torva-st&aolig;ðom. Hans son vas Isr&oelig;ðr,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a173.16>faðer Gunnildar, es átte Odde, son Asolfs í H&aolig;fða<note place=apparatus id=an173.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> S; es átte Asolfr í Hofða, H.</note>.


<p n=3.1><anchor id=a173.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Olver</hi> enn <hi rend=sc>Hvíte</hi> hét maðr, Ósvallz<note place=apparatus id=an173.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ósvallz]</ab> S; Olves, vell.</note> son, &OElig;xna-Þóris <anchor id=a173.18>sonar; hann vas lendr maðr, ok bió í Almd&aolig;lom. <anchor id=a173.19>Hann varð ósáttr við Hákon iarl Griótgarz son: hann fór á Yrjar, <anchor id=a173.20>ok dó þar. En Þórsteinn enn Hvíte, son hans, fór til Íslannz, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a173.21>kom skipe síno í Vápna-fi&aolig;rð efter land-n&aoacute;m. Hann keypte land <anchor id=a173.22>at Vápna, ok bió á Tofta-velle nockora vettr fyr útan Sireks-staðe<note place=apparatus id=an173.5><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> Sirex-, vell.</note>, <anchor id=a174.1><pb id=pb174 n=174><note place=margin>[240: iv. 2.]</note>áðr hann komsk at Hofs-l&aolig;ndom, með því móte, at hann heimte <anchor id=a174.2>leigo-fé sítt at Steinbirne Cort; en hann hafðe ecki til at gialda <anchor id=a174.3>nema landet. Þar bió Þórsteinn sex tigo<note place=apparatus id=an174.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> lx, vell.</note> vetra síðan; ok vas vitr <anchor id=a174.4>maðr ok góðr<note place=apparatus id=an174.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>maðr ok góðr]</ab> add. S.</note>. Hann átte Ingibi&aolig;rgo, dóttor Hroðgeirs ens <anchor id=a174.5>Hvíta: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau, Þórgils, ok Þórðr, Onundr, ok Þór&shy;bi&aolig;rg,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a174.6>ok Þóra. Þórgils átte Ásvoro, dóttor Þóriss, Graut-Atla <anchor id=a174.7>sonar: þeirra son vas Brodd-Helge, es átte fyrr H&aolig;llo, Lýtings <anchor id=a174.8>dóttor, Arnbiarnar sonar: þeirra son vas Víga-Biarne; hann átte <anchor id=a174.9>Rannveigo, dóttor Eiriks í Goðd&aolig;lom: þeirra son vas Skegg-Brodde; <anchor id=a174.10>en dótter Yngvildr, es átte Þórsteinn Hallz son. Skegg-Brodde<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a174.11>átte Goðrúno, dóttor Þórarens Sælings<note place=apparatus id=an174.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> S; d. Einars sælendings, H; cp. Liosv. S., ch. 25.</note> ok Halldóro Einars <anchor id=a174.12>dóttor: þeirra b&aolig;rn, Þórer, ok Biarne Hús-langr. Þórer átte <anchor id=a174.13>Steinunne, dóttor Þórgríms ens Háva: þeirra dótter vas Goðrún, <anchor id=a174.14>es átte Flose, son Kolbeins: þeirra son Biarne<note place=apparatus id=an174.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Biarnæ, vell.</note>, faðer Biarna, es <anchor id=a174.15>átte H&aolig;llo, Iorundar dóttor.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a174.16><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þórsteinn Torfe ok Lýtingr br&oeacute;ðr<note place=apparatus id=an174.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>br&oeacute;ðr]</ab> add. S.</note> fóro til Íslannz. Lýtingr <anchor id=a174.17>nam Vápna-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd alla ena eystre, B&aolig;ðvars-dal ok Fagra-dal, <anchor id=a174.18>ok bió í Crossa-vík; ok lifðe her f&aoacute; vettr.&mdash;Frá hónom ero <anchor id=a174.19>Vápn-firðingar komner. Geiter vas son Lýtings, faðer Þórkels.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a174.20><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórfiðr hét maðr, es fyrst bió á Skeggja-st&aolig;ðom at ráðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a174.21>Þórðar Halma. Hans son vas Þórsteinn Fagre, es vá Einar, son <anchor id=a175.1><pb id=pb175 n=175><note place=margin>[241: iv. 2.]</note>Þóris Graut-Atla sonar<note place=apparatus id=an175.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es vá ... Atla sonar]</ab> add. S.</note>; ok br&oeacute;ðr hans tveir, Þórkell<note place=apparatus id=an175.2><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórkell]</ab> Þórer, S.</note> ok Heðinn, <anchor id=a175.2>es v&aoacute;go Þórgils f&aolig;ðor Brodd-Helga.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a175.3><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórsteinn Torfe nam Hlíð alla, útan frá Ós-fi&aolig;llom ok upp <anchor id=a175.4>til Hvann-ár<note place=apparatus id=an175.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> S; Hvamsár, H.</note>, ok bió á Fors-velle. Hans son vas Þórvaldr, faðer <anchor id=a175.5>Þórgeirs, f&aolig;ðor Hallgeirs, f&aolig;ðor Hrapps á Fors-velle.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a175.6><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hákon hét maðr, es nam I&aolig;kuls-dal allan fyr vestan I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute;, <anchor id=a175.7>ok fyr ofan Teigar-&aoacute;, ok bió á Hákonar-st&aolig;ðom. Hans dótter <anchor id=a175.8>vas Þórbi&aolig;rg, es &aoacute;tto syner Brynjolfs ens Gamla, Gunnbi&aolig;rn, ok <anchor id=a175.9>Hallgrímr. Teigr lá ónumenn miðle Þórsteins Torfa ok Hákonar; <anchor id=a175.10>þann l&aolig;gðo þeir til hofs.&mdash;Sá heiter nú Hofs-teigr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=3.6><anchor id=a175.11><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Skioldolfr, Vémundar son, bróðer Berðlo-Kára, nam I&aolig;kuls-dal <anchor id=a175.12>fyr austan I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute;, ok upp frá C<hi>n</hi>efils-dals-&aoacute;; ok bió á <anchor id=a175.13>Skioldolfs-st&aolig;ðom. Hans b&aolig;rn vóro (þau) Þórsteinn, es átte Fast-nýjo, <anchor id=a175.14>Brynjolfs dóttor ens Gamla; ok Sigríðr, es átte Ozurr <anchor id=a175.15>Brynjolfs son; þeirra son Berse, es Bersa-staðer ero við kender.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=3.7><anchor id=a175.16><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þórðr Þvare, son Þórolfs Halma, bróðor Helga Bun-hauss; <anchor id=a175.17>hann nam Tungo-l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll miðle I&aolig;kuls-ár ok Lagar-fliótz, fyr <anchor id=a175.18>austan Rang-&aoacute;. Hans son vas Þórolfr Halme, es átte Goðríðe <anchor id=a175.19>Brynjolfs dóttor ens Gamla. Þeirra son vas Þórðr Þvare, faðer <anchor id=a175.20>Þóroddz<note place=apparatus id=an175.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Þóroz, vell. S; Rangar, vell.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Branz <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Steinunnar, m. Rannveigar, m. Sæhildar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a175.21>es Gizorr Hallz son átte<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=3.8><anchor id=a175.22><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Ozurr Slaga-collr nam land á miðle Orms-ár ok Rang-ár. <anchor id=a176.1><pb id=pb176 n=176><note place=margin>[243: iv. 2.]</note>Hann átte Goðnýjo, Brynjolfs dóttor: þeirra son vas Ásmundr, <anchor id=a176.2>faðer Marðar.


<p n=4.1><anchor id=a176.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ketill</hi> ok <hi rend=sc>Graut-Atle</hi>, syner Þóris Þiðranda, fóro <anchor id=a176.4>or Vera-dale til Íslannz, ok n&aoacute;mo land í Fliótz-dale, <anchor id=a176.5>fyrr an Bryniolfr kveme út, Lagar-fliótz-strander báðar: Ketill fyr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a176.6>vestan Fliótz-&aoacute;, miðle Hengi-fors-ár ok Orms-ár.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a176.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ketill fór útan ok vas með Veþorme, syne Vémundar ens <anchor id=a176.8>Gamla: þá keypte hann at Veþorme Arneiðe, dóttor Ásbiarnar <anchor id=a176.9>iarls Skerja-Blesa, es Holmfastr, son Veþorms, hafðe her-teket, þá <anchor id=a176.10>es þeir Grímr systor-son Veþorms, dr&aoacute;po Ásbi&aolig;rn iarl í Suðr-eyjom.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a176.11>Ketill Þrymr keypte Arneiðe tveimr<note place=apparatus id=an176.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> ij, vell.</note> hlutom dýrra an <anchor id=a176.12>Veþormr mat hána í fy<hi>r</hi>sto<note place=apparatus id=an176.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fy<hi>r</hi>sto]</ab> S; mystu (sic), vell.</note>. En áðr þau Ketill fóro til Íslannz, <anchor id=a176.13>fann Arneiðr silfr mikit under viðar-rótom, ok leynde Ketil til þess <anchor id=a176.14>es hann feck hennar. Þau fóro út, ok bioggo á Arneiðar-st&aolig;ðom. <anchor id=a176.15>Þeirra son vas Þiðrande, faðer Ketils í Niarð-vík.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a176.16>[S: En es kaupet var orðet, þá g&oelig;rðe Ketill brúðkaup til <anchor id=a176.17>Arneiðar. Efter þat fann hon graf-silfr mikit under viðar-rótum. <anchor id=a176.18>Þá bauð Ketill at flytja hána til frænda sínna; en hón kaus þá <anchor id=a176.19>hónom at fylgja. Þau fóro, etc.]

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a176.20><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Graut-Atle nam ena eystre str&aolig;nd Lagar-fliótz, allt á miðle<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a176.21>Gilj-ár ok Valla-ness, fyr vestan Oxa-l&oeacute;k<note place=apparatus id=an176.3><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Oxnalæk, S.</note>. Hans syner vóro þeir <anchor id=a176.22>Þórbi&aolig;rn, ok Þórer, es átte Ásv&aolig;ro Brynjolfs dóttor.


<pb id=pb177 n=177><note place=margin>[244: iv. 3.]</note>

<p n=5.1><anchor id=a177.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórgeirr</hi> Vestars son hét maðr g&aolig;fogr<note place=apparatus id=an177.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>g&aolig;fogr]</ab> add. S.</note>: hann <anchor id=a177.2>átte þriá sono, ok vas einn Brynjolfr enn Gamle: <anchor id=a177.3>annarr Ævarr enn Gamle: þriðe Herjolfr. Þeir fóro aller til <anchor id=a177.4>Íslannz; ok á síno skipe hverr þeirra.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a177.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Brynjolfr kom skipe síno í Eske-fi&aolig;rð; ok nam land fyr ofan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a177.6>fiall: Fliótz-dal allan fyr ofan Hengifors-&aoacute;<note place=apparatus id=an177.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-fors-&aoacute;]</ab> ok, add. S.</note>, fyr vestan; en fyr ofan <anchor id=a177.7>Gils-&aoacute; fyr austan; ok Skriðo-dal allan; ok svá V&aolig;llona út til <anchor id=a177.8>Eyvindar-ár; ok tók miket af land-náme Una Garðars sonar; ok <anchor id=a177.9>bygðe þar frændom ok m&aoacute;gom sínom. Hann átte tio b&aolig;rn. En <anchor id=a177.10>síðan feck hann Helgo, es átt hafðe Herjolfr, bróðer hans; ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a177.11>&aoacute;tto þau þriú b&aolig;rn. Þeirra son vas Ozorr, faðer Bersa [f. Holmsteins<note place=apparatus id=an177.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Holm.]</ab> add. S.</note>], <anchor id=a177.12>f&aolig;ðor Úr&oelig;kjo, f&aolig;ðor Holmsteins <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Helgo, m. Holmsteins, <anchor id=a177.13>f. Hallgerðar, m. Þorbiargar, er átte Loptr Byscops son<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=5.3><anchor id=a177.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ævarr hét maðr enn Gamle, bróðer Brynjolfs; (hann) kom út <anchor id=a177.15>í Reyðar-firðe; ok fór upp um fiall. Hónom gaf Brynjolfr<note place=apparatus id=an177.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> S; hann gaf Brynjolfe, vell.</note> Skriðo-dal<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a177.16>allan fyr ofan Gils-&aoacute;. Hann bió á Arnallz-st&aolig;ðom: hann átte <anchor id=a177.17>tvá sono ok d&oeacute;tr þriár.<note place=apparatus id=an177.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann átte ... þriár]</ab> add. S.</note>

<p n=5.4><anchor id=a177.18><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ísr&oelig;ðr<note place=apparatus id=an177.6><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> S; Asroðr, vell.</note> hét maðr, es feck Ásvarar, Herjolfs dóttor, bróðor-dóttor <anchor id=a177.19>Brynjolfs ok stiúp-dóttor: henne fylgðo heiman &aolig;ll l&aolig;nd <anchor id=a177.20>miðle Gils-ár ok Eyvindar-ár. Þau bioggo á Ketils-st&aolig;ðom:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a177.21>þeirra son vas Þórvaldr Holbarke, faðer Þórbergs, f&aolig;ðor Haf-Liótz, <anchor id=a178.1><pb id=pb178 n=178><note place=margin>[245: iv. 4.]</note>f&aolig;ðor Þórhaddz<note place=apparatus id=an178.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> &thornstrok;az, vell.</note> Skálar. Dótter Holbarka vas Þórunn, es átte <anchor id=a178.2>Þórbi&aolig;rn Graut-Atla son: &aolig;nnor Ástríðr, móðer Ásbiarnar Loðin-h&aolig;fða, <anchor id=a178.3>f&aolig;ðor Þórarens í Seyðar-firðe, f&aolig;ðor Ásbiarnar, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a178.4>Kolskeggs ens Fróða ok Ingileifar, móðor Hallz, f&aolig;ðor Finnz <anchor id=a178.5>L&aolig;gs&aolig;go mannz.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<p n=6.1><anchor id=a178.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrafnkell</hi> hét maðr, Hrafns son: hann kom út <anchor id=a178.7>síð lannáma-tíðar. Hann vas enn fyrsta vetr í Breið-dale; <anchor id=a178.8>en um váret fór hann upp um fiall.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a178.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann áðe í Skriðo-dale, ok sofnaðe. Þá dreymðe hann, at maðr <anchor id=a178.10>kom at hónom, ok bað hann upp standa, ok fara braut sem skiótazt.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a178.11>Hann vaknaðe<note place=apparatus id=an178.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> vackn-, vell.</note>, ok fór á braut; en es hann vas skamt komenn, þá <anchor id=a178.12>hlióp ofan fiallet allt, ok varð under g&aolig;ltr ok griðungr es hann <anchor id=a178.13>átte.

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a178.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Síðan nam hann Hrafnkels-dal, ok bió á Steinr&oelig;ðar-st&aolig;ðom. <anchor id=a178.15>Hans son vas Ásbi&aolig;rn, faðer Helga; ok Þórer, faðer Hrafnkels<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a178.16>Goða, f&aolig;ðor Sveinbiarnar.


<p n=7.1><anchor id=a178.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Une</hi> enn <hi rend=sc>Danske</hi><note place=apparatus id=an178.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Danzski, vell. Gardaz, vell.</note> eða enn Úborne, son Garðars <anchor id=a178.18>es fann Ísland, fór til Íslannz með ráðe Haralldz <anchor id=a178.19>konongs ens Hárfagra; ok ætlaðe at leggja under sik landet; en <anchor id=a178.20>síðan hafðe konongr heiteð at g&oelig;ra hann iarl sínn. Une tók land<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a178.21>þar sem nú heiter Una-óss, ok húsaðe þar. Hann nam ser land <anchor id=a178.22>til eignar fyr sunnan Lagar-fliót, allt hérað til Una-l&oeacute;kjar.

<pb id=pb179 n=179><note place=margin>[247: iv. 4.]</note>

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a179.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En es lannz-menn visso ætlan hans, tóko þeir at ýfask við <anchor id=a179.2>hann, ok vildo eige selja hónom kvik-fé eða vister: ok mátte hann <anchor id=a179.3>eige þar við halldask. Une fór braut, ok kom í Alfta-fi&aolig;rð-enn-syðra; <anchor id=a179.4>hann náðe þar eige at stað-festask: þá fór hann austan <anchor id=a179.5>með tolfta mann; ok kom at vetre til Leiðolfs kappa í Skóga-hverfe;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a179.6>hann tók við þeim. Une elskaðe Þórunne dóttor Leiðolfs; <anchor id=a179.7>ok vas hon með barne um váret. Þá vilde Une hlaupask braut <anchor id=a179.8>með menn sína; en Leiðolfr reið efter hónom; ok fundosk þeir <anchor id=a179.9>hiá Flanga-st&aolig;ðom, ok b&aolig;rðosk; þvi at Une vilde eige aftr fara <anchor id=a179.10>með Leiðolfe. Þar féllo nockorer menn af Una, en aftr fór hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a179.11>nauðegr, þvi at Leiðolfr vilde at hann fenge kono<note place=apparatus id=an179.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> kononnar, S.</note>, ok staðfestesk <anchor id=a179.12>þar, ok t&oeacute;ke arf efter hann. Nockoro síðarr hlióp Une í braut þá <anchor id=a179.13>es Leiðolfr vas eige heima, en Leiðolfr reið efter hónom þá es <anchor id=a179.14>hann visse; ok fundosk þeir hiá Kalfa-gr&aolig;fom. Hann vas þá svá <anchor id=a179.15>reiðr, at hann drap Una ok f&aolig;ro-nauta hans alla.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=7.2.1><anchor id=a179.16>Son Una ok Þórunnar vas Hróarr Tungo-Goðe; hann tók arf <anchor id=a179.17>Leiðolfs allan<note place=apparatus id=an179.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>allan]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok vas enn meste hermaðr. Hann átte Arngunne<note place=apparatus id=an179.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Arngunne]</ab> om. H, S; see Niala, ch. 19.</note> <anchor id=a179.18>dóttor Hámundar<note place=apparatus id=an179.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dóttor Hámundar]</ab> add. S.</note> systor Gunnars frá Hlíðar-enda: þeirra son vas <anchor id=a179.19>Hámundr enn Halte, enn meste víga-maðr. Tiorve enn Háðsame <anchor id=a179.20>ok Gunnarr vóro systor-syner Hróars.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=7.3><anchor id=a179.21><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Tiorve bað Ástríðar Manviz-brecku, Moðolfs dóttor; en <anchor id=a180.1><pb id=pb180 n=180><note place=margin>[248: iv. 4.]</note>br&oeacute;ðr hennar, Ketill ok Hrólfr, synjoðo hónom kono; en þeir <anchor id=a180.2>g&aoacute;fo hána Þóre Ketils syne. Því<note place=apparatus id=an180.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þvi]</ab> S; Þá, vell.</note> dró Tiorve líkneske þeirra á <anchor id=a180.3>camars-vegg. En hvert kveld es þeir Hróarr gengo til camars, þá <anchor id=a180.4>hrækðe hann í andlit líkneske Þóress, en kyste á hennar líkneske, <anchor id=a180.5>áðr Hróarr skóf af. Efter þat skar Hróarr þau á knífs-hefte<note place=apparatus id=an180.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> -skefte, S.</note> síno,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a180.6>ok kvað þetta:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a180.7>Ver h&aolig;fom þat sem Þóre ...
</lg>

<p n=7.3.1><anchor id=a180.8>Her af urðo víg Hróars ok systor-sona hans<note place=apparatus id=an180.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hans]</ab> here ends the last of the seven vell. leaves (see Bk. III. 8. 7).</note>.

<p n=7.3.2><anchor id=a180.9>[M&ast;: Heraf g&oelig;rðez fiándskapr þeirra meire, ok vógo þeir <anchor id=a180.10>syner Moðolfs Ketill ok Hrólfr, ok Brandr frá Gnúpom, f&aolig;ðor-bróðer<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a180.11>þeirra, ok Þórer Ketils son, es átte Ástríðe: Hróar Goða, <anchor id=a180.12>ok Tiorva, ok Kolbein.]


<p n=8.1><anchor id=a180.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórkell Full-spakr</hi> hét maðr, es nam Niarð-vík <anchor id=a180.14>alla, ok bió þar. Hans dótter vas Þióðhildr<note place=apparatus id=an180.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> S; Þórhildr, Cd.</note>, es <anchor id=a180.15>átte Ævarr enn Gamle, ok vas þeirra dótter Yngvilldr, móðer<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a180.16>Ketils í Niarð-vík, Þiðranda sonar.

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a180.17><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Vetr-liðe hét maðr, son Árinbiarnar<note place=apparatus id=an180.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Arnbiarnar, S.</note>, Óláfs sonar Lang-hals, <anchor id=a180.18>bróðer þeirra Lýtings<note place=apparatus id=an180.6><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>br. þ. Lýt.]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok Þórsteins Torfa, ok Þórbiarnar í Arnar-holte. <anchor id=a180.19>Óláfr Langhals vas son Biarnar Reyðar-síðo. Vetr-liðe <anchor id=a180.20>nam Borgar-fi&aolig;rð ok bió þar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>


<pb id=pb181 n=181><note place=margin>[249: iv. 5.]</note>

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a181.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórer Lína hét maðr, es nam Breiða-vík, ok bió þar: hans <anchor id=a181.2>syner vóro þeir Gunnsteinn, ok Sveinungr.

<p n=8.3.1><anchor id=a181.3>Nú hefer Kolskeggr fyrer sagt um land-n&aoacute;m<note place=apparatus id=an181.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> fyrer sagt heðan frá um landn., S.</note>.


<p n=9.1><anchor id=a181.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórsteinn Clegge</hi> nam fyrst Húsa-vík, ok bió <anchor id=a181.5>þar: hans son vas Are, es Húsvíkingar ero frá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a181.6>komner.

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a181.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Loðmundr enn Gamle hét maðr, en annarr Biólfr, fóst-bróðer <anchor id=a181.8>hans. Þeir fóro til Íslannz af Vors af Þulu-nese. Loðmundr vas <anchor id=a181.9>miok troll-aukenn<note place=apparatus id=an181.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>troll-aukenn]</ab> rammauken miok ok fiol-kunnigr, S.</note>. Hann skaut &aolig;ndoges-súlom sínom fyr borð í <anchor id=a181.10>hafe, ok kvazk þar skyldo byggja sem þar ræke. En þeir fóst&shy;br&oeacute;ðr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a181.11>tóko Austfi&aolig;rðo; ok nam Loðmundr Loðmundar-fi&aolig;rð, ok <anchor id=a181.12>bió þar þriá vettr. Þá frá hann til &aolig;ndoges-súlna sínna fyr<note place=apparatus id=an181.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> iii, Cd.; þenna, S.</note> sunnan <anchor id=a181.13>land. Efter þat bar hann á skip þat es hann átte<note place=apparatus id=an181.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þat ... átte]</ab> oll fong sín, S.</note>.

<p n=9.2.1><anchor id=a181.14>En es segl vas undet, lagðesk hann niðr, ok bað &oelig;ngan mann <anchor id=a181.15>nefna sik. En es hann hafðe lítla hríð leget, varð gnýrr mikill, ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a181.16>hlióp skriða mikil á b&oeacute; þann, es Loðmundr hafðe átt<note place=apparatus id=an181.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>átt]</ab> buet á, S.</note>. Efter þat <anchor id=a181.17>settesk hann upp, ok mælte: &lsquo;Þat es álag mítt, at þat skip skal <anchor id=a181.18>aldrí heilt af hafa koma heðan af, es her sigler út.&rsquo;

<p n=9.3><anchor id=a181.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hann hélt suðr fyr Horn, ok vestr með lande allt<note place=apparatus id=an181.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>með lande allt]</ab> add. S.</note> fyr Ingolfs-h&aolig;fða, <anchor id=a182.1><pb id=pb182 n=182><note place=margin>[250: iv. 5.]</note>ok lende nockoro vestarr. Hann nam þar land sem súlornar <anchor id=a182.2>h&aolig;fðo á land komet, ok a miðle Hafrs-ár ok Fúla-l&oeacute;kjar&mdash;þat <anchor id=a182.3>es nú I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute; á Sólheima-sande.&mdash;Hann bió í Loðmundar-hvamme&mdash;þat <anchor id=a182.4>heiter nú Sól-heimar.

<p n=9.4><anchor id=a182.5><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þá es Loðmundr vas gamall<note place=apparatus id=an182.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es L. vas gamall]</ab> add. S. hann vas ok f.] add. S.</note>, bió Þrase í Skógom; hann vas<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a182.6>ok fiolkunnigr; ok vas íllt í bygð þeirra Loðmundar. Þrase sá <anchor id=a182.7>um morgin vatna-hlaup miket ofan. En þau v&aolig;tn veitte hann með <anchor id=a182.8>fiolkynge sínne austr fyr Sólheima. Þræll Loðmundar sá, ok kvað <anchor id=a182.9>falla sió norðan yfer landet. Loðmundr vas þá sión-lauss, ok mælte <anchor id=a182.10>við þrælenn, &lsquo;F&oelig;rðú mer í dæle-kere<note place=apparatus id=an182.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dæle-kere]</ab> S; kere lítlu, H.</note> þat es þú kallar sió vesa.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a182.11>Hann g&oelig;rðe svá; Loðmundr sagðe, &lsquo;Ecke þycke mer þetta siór <anchor id=a182.12>vesa; fylgðú mer til vatzens, ok stick stafs-brodd<hi>e</hi> mínom í vatneð.&rsquo; <anchor id=a182.13>Hann g&oelig;rðe svá. Hringr vas í stafnom. Loðmundr hélt á staf&shy;nom <anchor id=a182.14>tveim h&aolig;ndom<note place=apparatus id=an182.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tveim h&aolig;ndom]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok beit í hringinn. Því næst féllo &aolig;ll v&aolig;tnen <anchor id=a182.15>vestr fyr Skóga. Síðan veitte hvárr þeirra v&aolig;tnen frá ser, þar til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a182.16>es þeir fundosk við gliúfr nockor; ok sættosk á þat, at &aoacute;en skylde <anchor id=a182.17>falla þar til sióvar sem skemst es.&mdash;Í þeim vatna-gange varð Sól-heima-sandr. <anchor id=a182.18>Þar es fiórðunga mót, ok Iokuls-&aoacute; á miðjom sande.

<p n=9.5><anchor id=a182.19><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Son Loðmundar vas Sumarliðe, faðer Þórsteins Holmunz, <anchor id=a182.20>f&aolig;ðor Þóro, móðor Steins, Brandax sonar, f&aolig;ðor Þóro es átte<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a182.21>Skafte L&aolig;g(s&aolig;go)-maðr.

<pb id=pb183 n=183><note place=margin>[252: iv. 6.]</note>


<p n=10.1><anchor id=a183.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Biólfr</hi>, fóst-bróðer Loðmundar, nam Seyðis-fi&aolig;rð <anchor id=a183.2>allan; ok bió þar alla æve. Hann gaf Helgo, dóttor <anchor id=a183.3>sína, Áne<note place=apparatus id=an183.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Án, Cd.</note> enom Ramma; ok fylgðe henne heiman &aolig;ll en n&oelig;rðre <anchor id=a183.4>strond Seyðis-fiarðar til Vestdals-ár. En Ísolfr hét son Biólfs, es <anchor id=a183.5>þar bió síðan<note place=apparatus id=an183.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es þar bió s.]</ab> add. S.</note>, es Seyðfirðingar &apos;ro frá komner.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a183.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Eyvindr hét maðr, sá es út kom með Brynjolfe, ok f&oeacute;rðe <anchor id=a183.7>síðan<note place=apparatus id=an183.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>síðan]</ab> add. S.</note> bygð sína í Mióva-fi&aolig;rð, ok bió þar. Hans son vas Hrafn, <anchor id=a183.8>es selde Mióva-fiarðar-land Þórkatle<note place=apparatus id=an183.4><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Þorkele, Cd.</note> Cloco, es þar bió síðan. Frá <anchor id=a183.9>hónom er Cloco-ætt komen.

<p n=10.3><anchor id=a183.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Egill enn Rauðe hét maðr, es nam Norð-fi&aolig;rð, ok bió á Nese<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a183.11>út: hans son vas Óláfr, es Nes-menn ero frá komner.

<p n=10.4><anchor id=a183.12><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Freysteinn enn Fagre hét maðr, es nam Sand-vík ok Barz-nes, <anchor id=a183.13>ok Hellis-fi&aolig;rð, ok Við-fi&aolig;rð.&mdash;Frá hónom ero Sandfirðingar <anchor id=a183.14>ok Viðfirðingar, ok Hellis-firðingar komner.

<p n=10.5><anchor id=a183.15><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórer enn Háve, ok Crumr hét annarr: þeir fóro af Vors til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a183.16>Íslannz. Ok þá es þeir kómo ok tóko land, nam Þórer Crossa-vík <anchor id=a183.17>ok á miðle<note place=apparatus id=an183.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok á miðle]</ab> S om, ok.</note> Gerpis ok Reyðar-fiarðar.&mdash;Þaðan ero Cross-víkingar <anchor id=a183.18>komner.

<p n=10.6><anchor id=a183.19><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> En Crumr nam land á Hafra-nese ok allt til Þerno-ness; ok <anchor id=a183.20>allt et ýtra, bæðe Skrúð<note place=apparatus id=an183.6><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Skruðey, S.</note> ok aðrar út-eyjar; ok þriú l&aolig;nd æðrom-megin<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a183.21>Þerno-ness<note place=apparatus id=an183.7><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> gegnt Þerno-nese, S.</note>.&mdash;Þaðan ero Crymlingar komner.

<pb id=pb184 n=184><note place=margin>[254: iv. 7.]</note>

<p n=10.7><anchor id=a184.1><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Ævarr vas fyrst í Reyðar-firðe, áðr harm fór upp um fiall: <anchor id=a184.2>en Brynjolfr í Eske-firðe, áðr hann fór at byggja Fliótz dal, sem áðr <anchor id=a184.3>es ritið.

<p n=10.8><anchor id=a184.4><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Vémundr hét maðr, es nam Fáskrúðs-fi&aolig;rð; ok bió þar alla <anchor id=a184.5>æve<note place=apparatus id=an184.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>alla æve]</ab> add. S.</note>. Son hans var Olmóðr, es Olm&oeacute;ðlingar &apos;ro frá komner.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<p n=11.1><anchor id=a184.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórhaddr</hi> enn <hi rend=sc>Gamle</hi> vas hof-goðe í Þrónd-heime <anchor id=a184.7>inn á Mærine. Hann fýstesk til Íslannz; ok <anchor id=a184.8>tók áðr ofan hofet, ok hafðe með ser hofs-moldena ok súlornar. En <anchor id=a184.9>hann kom í St&aolig;ðvar-fi&aolig;rð; ok lagðe Mærena helge á allan fi&aolig;rð-enn; <anchor id=a184.10>ok lét &oelig;ngo tortína þar nema kvik-fé heimolo. Hann bió<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a184.11>þar alla æve.&mdash;Frá hónom &apos;ro St&aolig;ðfirðingar komner.

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a184.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Healte hét maðr, es nam Kleifar-l&aolig;nd, ok allan Breið-dal þar <anchor id=a184.13>upp frá<note place=apparatus id=an184.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þar upp frá]</ab> add. S.</note>. Hans son vas Colgrímr, es mart manna es frá komet.

<p n=11.3><anchor id=a184.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Herjolfr hét maðr, es nam land allt út til Hvals-nes-skriðna: <anchor id=a184.15>hans son vas Eyvindr Vápne, es Væpnlingar &apos;ro frá komner.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=11.4><anchor id=a184.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Herjolfr, bróðer Brynjolfs, nam Heydala-land<note place=apparatus id=an184.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> l&nmacr;d, Cd.; -laund, S.</note>, fyr neðan <anchor id=a184.17>Tinno-dals-&aoacute;, ok út til Orms-ár. Hans son vas Ozorr, es Breið-d&oeacute;ler <anchor id=a184.18>&apos;ro frá komner.

<p n=11.5><anchor id=a184.19><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Ski&aolig;ldolfr hét maðr, es nam Streite, allt fyr útan Gnúpenn <anchor id=a184.20>&aolig;rðrom-megen<note place=apparatus id=an184.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> ok oðrum megin, S.</note> til Óss, ok til Skioldolfs-ness hiá Fagra-dals-&aoacute; í<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a185.1><pb id=pb185 n=185><note place=margin>[255: iv. 7.]</note>Breið-dale<note place=apparatus id=an185.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-dale]</ab> S.</note>. Hans son vas Háleygr, es þar bió síðan. Frá hónom <anchor id=a185.2>es Háleygja-ætt komen.

<p n=11.6><anchor id=a185.3><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þióðrekr hét maðr; hann nam fyrst Breið-dal allan; en hann <anchor id=a185.4>st&oelig;ck braut þaðan fyrer Brynjolfe ok ofan í Bero-fi&aolig;rð, ok nam <anchor id=a185.5>þar alla ena n&oelig;rðre str&aolig;nd Bero-fiarðar, ok fyr sunnan um Búlanz-nes,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a185.6>ok inn til Rauða-skriðna &aolig;ðrom-megin; ok bió þriá vettr þar <anchor id=a185.7>es nú heiter Skále. Síðan keypte Bi&aolig;rn enn Háve iarðer at <anchor id=a185.8>hónom&mdash;ok ero frá hónom Berfirðingar<note place=apparatus id=an185.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Berufirðingar, S, H.</note> komner.

<p n=11.7><anchor id=a185.9><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Biorn Sviðin-horne hét sá maðr es nam Alfta-fi&aolig;rð enn <anchor id=a185.10>n&oelig;rðra inn frá Rauða-skriðom, ok Sviðinhorna-dal.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=11.8><anchor id=a185.11><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þórsteinn Trumbo-bein hét frænde B&aolig;ðvars ens Hvíta, ok fór <anchor id=a185.12>með hónom til Íslannz. Hann nam land<note place=apparatus id=an185.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>land]</ab> add. S.</note> fyr útan Leiro-vág til <anchor id=a185.13>Hvals-ness-skriðna. Hans son vas Collr enn Gráe, faðer Þórsteins, <anchor id=a185.14>f&aolig;ðor Þórgríms í Borgar-h&aolig;fn, f&aolig;ðor Steinunnar, es átte Gizorr <anchor id=a185.15>byscop.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>


<p n=12.1><anchor id=a185.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Boðvarr</hi> enn <hi rend=sc>Hvíte</hi>&mdash;son Þórleifs Miðlungs, <anchor id=a185.17>B&aolig;ðvars sonar Snæ-þrimo, Þórleifs sonar Hvala-skúfs, <anchor id=a185.18>Áns sonar, Arnar sonar<note place=apparatus id=an185.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Arnar sonar]</ab> S; sonar (.s.), om. Cd. kongs, Cd.</note> Hyrno, Þóres sonar konungs, Svína-B&aolig;ðvars <anchor id=a185.19>sonar, Cauns sonar konungs, Solga<note place=apparatus id=an185.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Solga]</ab> Fas. ii. 143; Sauga, S; Solva, Cd.</note> sonar, Hrólfs-sonar <anchor id=a185.20>konungs or Berge, Svása sonar I&aolig;tuns norðan af Dofrom&mdash;<hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Hrólfr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a185.21>konungr átte Gó, es Gó-mánaðr es við kendr, systor þeirra Górs <anchor id=a186.1><pb id=pb186 n=186><note place=margin>[257: iv. 7.]</note>ok Nórs, es Noregr es við kendr<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>&mdash;ok Brand-Onundr, frænde <anchor id=a186.2>hans, fóro af Vors til Íslannz, ok kómo í Alfta-fi&aolig;rð enn Syðra.

<p n=12.2><anchor id=a186.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> B&aolig;ðvarr nam ínn frá Leiro-váge, dala þá alla, es þar liggja, <anchor id=a186.4>ok út annan veg til Múla, ok bió at Hofe. Hann reiste þar hof <anchor id=a186.5>miket.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p><anchor id=a186.6>Son B&aolig;ðvars vas Þórsteinn, es átte Þórdíse, dóttor Ozorar keiles-elgs<note place=apparatus id=an186.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6</ab> keili Selgs, S.</note>, <anchor id=a186.7>Hrollaugs sonar. Þeirra son vas Síðo-Hallr, es átte Ióreiðe, <anchor id=a186.8>Þiðranda dóttor. Ok es þaðan mikil ætt komen. Son þeirra vas <anchor id=a186.9>Þórsteinn, faðer Ámunda, f&aolig;ðor Goðrúnar.

<p n=12.3><anchor id=a186.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Brand-Onundr nam land fyr norðan Múla, Kams-dal<note place=apparatus id=an186.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10</ab> Kams- (not kambs-), S and H.</note>, ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a186.11>Melracka-nes, ok inn til Hamars-ár&mdash;ok es mart manna frá hónom <anchor id=a186.12>komet.


<p n=13.1><anchor id=a186.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórðr Skegge</hi> nam l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll í Lóne fyr norðan <anchor id=a186.14>I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute; miðle ok Lóns-heiðar, ok bió í B&oeacute; tio <anchor id=a186.15>vettr<note place=apparatus id=an186.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14</ab> <ab type=textRef>tio vettr]</ab> eðr lengr, add. S.</note>. En es hann frá til &aolig;ndoges-súlna sínna í Leiro-váge fyr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a186.16>neðan Heiðe, þá selðe hann l&aolig;nd sín Ulflióte L&aolig;gmanne es þar <anchor id=a186.17>kom út í Lóne, syne Þóro, dóttor Ketils Horða-Kára, Ásláks sonar <anchor id=a186.18>Bifra-Kára, Ánar sonar, Arnar sonar<note place=apparatus id=an186.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18</ab> <ab type=textRef>Arnar sonar]</ab> Arnar, omitting &lsquo;s.,&rsquo; Cd.</note> Hyrno.&mdash;Bió Þórðr nockora <anchor id=a186.19>vettr síðan í Lóne síðan (es) hann spurðe til &aolig;ndoges-súlna sínna.

<p n=13.2><anchor id=a186.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En es <corr sic="Ulflíótr">Ulfliótr</corr> vas sext&oelig;gr at alldre, fór hann til Noregs<note place=apparatus id=an186.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20</ab> Norex, Cd.</note>, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a186.21>vas þar þriá vet<hi>t</hi>r. Þar setto þeir Þórleifr enn Spake, móðor-bróðer <anchor id=a187.1><pb id=pb187 n=187><note place=margin>[259: iv. 8.]</note>hans, l&aolig;g þau, es síðan vóro k&aolig;lloð Ulfliótz-l&aolig;g. En es <anchor id=a187.2>hann kom út, vas sett Alþinge, ok h&aolig;fðo menn síðan ein l&aolig;g á <anchor id=a187.3>lande her.

<p><anchor id=a187.4>[<hi lang=en-UK>Law here eliminated, and transferred to Bk. II.</hi> § 2 (<hi rend=sc>I</hi>, <hi rend=sc>III</hi>, <hi rend=sc>IX</hi>).]

<p n=13.3><anchor id=a187.5><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórsteinn Leggr, son Biarnar Blá-tannar, fór or Suðreyjom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a187.6>til Íslannz; ok nam l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll fyr norðan Horn til I&aolig;kuls-ár í <anchor id=a187.7>Lóne, ok bió í B&aolig;ðvars-holte þriá vettr. Hann selðe síðan landet<note place=apparatus id=an187.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> londen, S.</note> <anchor id=a187.8>ok fór aftr í Suðreyjar.


<p n=14.1><anchor id=a187.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rognvalðr</hi> iarl á M&aoacute;re, son Eysteins Glumro, <anchor id=a187.10>Ívars sonar Upplendinga-iarls, Halfdanar sonar ens<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a187.11>Gamla: R&aolig;gnvaldr átte Ragnillde, dóttor Hrolfs Nefjo; þeirra <anchor id=a187.12>son vas Ívarr, es fell í Suðreyjom með Haralde kononge enom <anchor id=a187.13>Hárfagra.

<p n=14.1.1><anchor id=a187.14>Annarr vas Gongo-Hrólfr, es vann Nordmandi.&mdash;Frá hónom ero <anchor id=a187.15>Rúðo-iarlar komner ok Engla konongar.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=14.1.2><anchor id=a187.16>Þriðe vas Þórer iarl Þegjande, es átte Álofo Árbót, dóttor Harallz <anchor id=a187.17>konungs (ens) Hárfagra; ok vas þeirra dótter Bergliót, móðer <anchor id=a187.18>Hákonar iarls ens Rík<hi>j</hi>a.

<p n=14.2><anchor id=a187.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> R&aolig;gnvaldr iarl átte friðlo-sono þriá: hét einn Hrollaugr: <anchor id=a187.20>annarr Einarr: þriðe Hallaðr. Sá<note place=apparatus id=an187.2><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> (Sá) es, add. Cd.</note> veltesk or iarls-dómenom í<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a187.21>Orkneyjom. En es R&aolig;gnvaldr iarl frá þat, þá kallaðe hann saman <anchor id=a187.22>sono sína, ok spurðe, hverr þeirra þá vilde til Orkneyja: en Þórer <anchor id=a187.23>bað hann siá fyr sínne ferð. Iarl kvað hann þar skyldo ríke taka <anchor id=a188.1><pb id=pb188 n=188><note place=margin>[260: iv. 9]</note>efter f&aolig;ðor sínn. Þá geck Hrólfr framm, ok bauð sik til farar. <anchor id=a188.2>R&aolig;gnvaldr kvað hónom vel hent fyr sakar afls ok hreyste; en <anchor id=a188.3>kvezk ætla, at meire ofse væri í skape hans, an hann mætte þegar <anchor id=a188.4>fyre ríke ráða<note place=apparatus id=an188.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>an ... ráða]</ab> en h. m. at londum seljask, S.</note>. Þá geck Hrollaugr fram, ok spurðe, ef hann vilde <anchor id=a188.5>at hann f&oeacute;re. R&aolig;gnvaldr kvað hann ecki iarl mundo verða,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a188.6>&lsquo;Hefer þú ecki styrjaldar-skaplynde; mono vegar þíner liggja til <anchor id=a188.7>Íslannz, ok muntú þar verða g&aolig;fogr, ok kynsæll á því lande; en <anchor id=a188.8>enge ero her forl&aolig;g þín.&rsquo; Þá geck Einarr fram ok mælte: &lsquo;Láttú <anchor id=a188.9>mik fara til Orkneyja; ok mon ek þer því heita, es þer mun bazt <anchor id=a188.10>þikkja, at ek mun aldrigi koma aftr; né þer í augsýn.&rsquo; Iarlenn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a188.11>mælte: &lsquo;Vel þicki mer at þú farer braut; en lítils es mer v&aoacute;n at <anchor id=a188.12>þer; þvi at þín móðor-ætt es &aolig;ll þræl-boren.&rsquo; Efter þat fór Einarr <anchor id=a188.13>vestr, ok lagðe under sik Orkneyjar&mdash;sem seger í s&aolig;go hans. <anchor id=a188.14>Hrollaugr fór til Harallz konongs, ok vas með hónom um hríð; <anchor id=a188.15>þvi at þeir feðgar kómo eige skape saman efter þetta.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=14.3><anchor id=a188.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hrollaugr fór síðan til Íslannz með ráðe Harallz konongs,<note place=apparatus id=an188.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> S; Hann, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a188.17>ok hafðe með ser kono sína ok sono. Hann kom austr at Horne; <anchor id=a188.18>ok skaut þar fyr borð &aolig;ndoges-súlom sínom; ok bar þær á land í <anchor id=a188.19>Horna-firðe; en hann rak undan, ok vestr fyr landet; feck hann <anchor id=a188.20>þá úte-vist harða ok vatn-fátt. Þeir tóko land vestr í Leiro-váge<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a188.21>á Nesjom; ok vas hann þar enn fyrsta vettr. Þá frá hann til <anchor id=a188.22>&aolig;ndoges-súlna<note place=apparatus id=an188.3><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&aolig;ndoges-]</ab> add. S. þannog] add. S (þann veg).</note> sínna; ok fór austr þannog. Hann vas annan vettr <anchor id=a189.1><pb id=pb189 n=189><note place=margin>[261: iv. 10.]</note>under Ingolfs-felle. Síðan fór hann austr í Horna-fi&aolig;rð; ok nam <anchor id=a189.2>land austan frá Horne til Kví-ár; ok bió fyrst under Skarz-brecko <anchor id=a189.3>í Horna-firðe; en síðan á Breiða-bólstað í Feliz-hverfe, þá hafðe <anchor id=a189.4>hann lógat þeim l&aolig;ndom es norðr vóro frá Borgar-h&aolig;fn; en hann <anchor id=a189.5>átte til dauða-dags þau l&aolig;nd es suðr vóro frá Hegg-gerðis-múla<note place=apparatus id=an189.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá hafðe ... -múla]</ab> add. S (reading &lsquo;Hregg-&rsquo;).</note>.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p><anchor id=a189.6>Hrollaugr<note place=apparatus id=an189.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hrollaugr]</ab> S; hann, H.</note> vas h&aolig;fðinge mikill, ok hélt vingan við Harald konong, <anchor id=a189.7>en fór aldri útan<note place=apparatus id=an189.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en fór a. útan]</ab> add. S. [M&ast; adds, Ok eige vitjade hann Rognvallz iarls foðor síns; þvi at hónom var ótitt við stiúp-móðor sína.]</note>; ok sende konongr hónom<note place=apparatus id=an189.4><ab type=textRef>hónom]</ab> gersemar á dey-janda dege ..., M&ast; (sic).</note> sverð, ok &aolig;l-horn, ok <anchor id=a189.8>goll-hring es vá fimm aura. Sverð þat átte síðan Colr, son Síðo-Hallz, <anchor id=a189.9>en Kolskeggr enn Fróðe hafðe séð hornet<note place=apparatus id=an189.5><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en Kolsk ... hornet]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=14.4><anchor id=a189.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hrollaugr vas faðer Ozorar keilis-elgs, es átte Gró, dóttor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a189.11>Þórðar Illoga: þeirra dótter vas Þórdís, móðer Hallz á Síðo. <anchor id=a189.12>Annarr son Hrollaugs vas Hróalldr, faðer Óttars Hval-roar.

<p><anchor id=a189.13>Onundr vas enn þriðe son Hrollaugs.<note place=apparatus id=an189.6><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> [H (and S) add&mdash;Hallr á Siðo átte Ióreiðe Þiðranda d.; þeirra s. Þorsteinn, f. Magnuss, f. Einars, f. Magnuss bps. Annarr son Hallz var Egill, f. Þorgerðar, m. Jons bps. ens Helga. Þórvarðr Hallz son var faðer Þórdísar, m. Iórunnar, m. Hallz prestz, f. Gizorar, f. þeirra Magnuss bps., ok Þorvallz, f. Gizurar iarls. Yngvildr Hallz d. var m. Þóreyjar, m. Sæmundar prestz ens Fróða. Þorsteinn Hallz son var faðer Guðríðar, m. Ióreiðar, m. Ara prestz ens Fróða. Þorgerðr Hallz d. var m. Yngvildar, m. Liótz, sem fyrr er rítað.] <hi lang=en-UK>All these passages, from</hi> &lsquo;Hallz á Síðo ...,&rsquo; <hi lang=en-UK>appear to be extraneous interpolations. Instead of the last</hi>, &lsquo;sem f. er rítað,&rsquo; S <hi>repeats,</hi> f. Iarn&shy;gerðar, m. Valgerðar, m. Boðvars, m. Guðnyjar, m. Sturlo-sona.</note>

<p n=14.5><anchor id=a189.14><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Ketill hét maðr, es Hrollaugr selðe Horna-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd, <anchor id=a189.15>útan frá Home, ok inn til Hamra. Hann bió at Meðal-felle. Frá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a189.16>hónom ero Horn-firðingar komner.

<pb id=pb190 n=190><note place=margin>[263: iv. 10.]</note>

<p n=14.6><anchor id=a190.1><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Auðunn enn Rauðe keypte land at Hrollauge, útan frá <anchor id=a190.2>H&aolig;mrom, ok út &aolig;ðrom-megin til Við-borz. Hann bió í Hofs-felle, <anchor id=a190.3>ok reiste þar hof miket. Frá hónom ero Hofs-fellingar <anchor id=a190.4>komner.

<p n=14.7><anchor id=a190.5><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Ulfr<note place=apparatus id=an190.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5, 11.</ab> S inverts Ulf and Thorstein.</note> enn Vorske keypte land at Hrollauge suðr frá Heina-bergs-&aoacute;m<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a190.6>til Hegg-gerðis-múla; ok bió at Skála-felle fyrstr manna. <anchor id=a190.7>Frá hónom ero Vorsar komner.

<p n=14.8><anchor id=a190.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Síðan f&oeacute;rðe Ulfr bú sítt í Pappýle ok bió á Breiða-bólstað; <anchor id=a190.9>ok es þar haugr hans, ok svá Þórgeirs-haugr<note place=apparatus id=an190.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórgeirs-]</ab> (!) Þortetts, Cd.</note>. Þórgeirr vas son <anchor id=a190.10>Vorsa-Ulfs, ok bió at Hofe í Pappyle.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=14.9><anchor id=a190.11><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Þórsteinn enn Skialge keypte land at Hrollauge, allt frá Við-borðe, <anchor id=a190.12>suðr um Mýrar til Heina-bergs-ár. Hans son vas Vestmárr<note place=apparatus id=an190.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Vest-márr]</ab> S and H.</note> <anchor id=a190.13>es Mýra-menn ero frá komner.

<p n=14.10><anchor id=a190.14><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Þórðr Illoge, son Eyvindar Eiki-krox, Helga sonar, Helga <anchor id=a190.15>sonar, Biarnars onar Buno: hann braut skip sítt á Breiðár-sande.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a190.16>Hónom gaf Hrollaugr land á miðle I&aolig;kuls-ár ok Kví-ár. Hann <anchor id=a190.17>bió under Felle við Breið-&aoacute;. Hans syner vóro þeir, Orn Sterke, <anchor id=a190.18>es deilðe við Þórdíse Iarls dóttor, systor Hrollaugs<note place=apparatus id=an190.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hrollaugs]</ab> Hrolfs, Cd.</note>; ok Eyvindr <anchor id=a190.19>Smiðr. D&oeacute;ttr hans vóro þær Groa, es Ozorr átte; ok Þórdís, <anchor id=a190.20>móðer Þórbiargar, móðor Þórðar Illoga, es vá Víga-Scúto.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>


<p n=15.1><anchor id=a190.21><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> Asbiorn hét maðr, son Heyangrs-Biarnar, hersiss or <anchor id=a190.22>Sogne; hann vas son Helga, Helga sonar, Biarnar <anchor id=a191.1><pb id=pb191 n=191><note place=margin>[264: iv. 10.]</note>sonar Buno<note place=apparatus id=an191.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hersiss ... Buno]</ab> add. S.</note>. Hann andaðesk í Íslannz hafe þá es hann vilde út <anchor id=a191.2>fara; en Þórgerðr kona hans fór út ok syner þeirra.

<p n=15.2><anchor id=a191.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an191.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> S om. this §.</note>En þat vas mælt, at kona skylde eige víðara nema land an <anchor id=a191.4>leiða mætte kvígo tvæ-vetra vár-langan dag sól-setra miðle, half <anchor id=a191.5>stalit<note place=apparatus id=an191.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Half | stalit, junction of leaves in John Erlendsson&apos;s copy.</note> naut ok haft vel. Því leidde Þórgerðr kvígo sína undan Tofta-felle<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a191.6>skamt frá Kví-&aoacute; suðr, ok í Kiðja-leit<note place=apparatus id=an191.4><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Read, Kiðja-klett?</note> hiá I&aolig;kuls-felle<note place=apparatus id=an191.5><ab type=textRef>I&aolig;kuls-felle]</ab> here come in two continuous vellum leaves.</note> fyr <anchor id=a191.7>vestan.

<p n=15.3><anchor id=a191.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórgerðr nam þar land um allt Ingolfs-(h&aolig;fða)-hverfe, á <anchor id=a191.9>miðle Kví-ár ok I&aolig;kuls-ár; ok bió at Sand-felle. Hennar son <anchor id=a191.10>vas Ozorr í Backa-holte; ok enn ellre Veðormr, faðer Þóríðar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a191.11>hof-gyðju. Ozorr vas faðer Þórðar Freys-goða. Alfeiðr vas móðer <anchor id=a191.12>Þórðar Freys-goða, ok Þóríðar hof-gyðjo.

<p n=15.3.1><anchor id=a191.13>[S: Ásbiorn fór til Íslannz ok dó í hafe; en Þórgerðr kona <anchor id=a191.14>hans, ok syner þeirra kvómo út, ok n&aoacute;mo allt Ingolfs-h&aolig;fða-hverfe <anchor id=a191.15>á mille Kví-ár ok Iokuls-ár, ok bió hon at Sandfelle, ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a191.16>Guðlaugr, son þeirra Ásbiarnar, efter hána. Frá honom ero Sand&shy;fellíngar <anchor id=a191.17>komner. Annarr son þeirra vas Þórgils, es Hnapp&shy;fellingar <anchor id=a191.18>ero frá komner. Þriðe vas Ozorr faðer Þórðar Freys-goða, <anchor id=a191.19>es mart manna es frá komet.]

<p n=15.4><anchor id=a191.20><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Helge hét annarr son Heyangrs-Biarnar. Hann fór til Íslannz,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a192.1><pb id=pb192 n=192><note place=margin>[266: iv. 10.]</note>ok bió at Rauða-l&oeacute;k, at ráðe Þórgerðar frá Sand-felle. Hans son <anchor id=a192.2>vas Hilder, es Rauð-l&oeacute;kingar &apos;ro frá komner.

<p n=15.5><anchor id=a192.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Bárðr hét enn fiórðe son Heyangrs-Biarnar, es fyr es geteð<note place=apparatus id=an192.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es fyr es g.]</ab> add. S.</note>; <anchor id=a192.4>es fyrst nam Bárðar-dal norðr; en síðan fór hann suðr um Vánar-skarð, <anchor id=a192.5>Bárðar-g&aolig;to; ok nam Fliótz-hverfe allt; ok bió at Gnúpom.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a192.6>Hann vas kallaðr Gnúpa-Bárðr. Hans<note place=apparatus id=an192.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> S; hans s. vas, vell.</note> syner vóro, Þórsteinn, Sigmundr, <anchor id=a192.7>Egill, Gísle<note place=apparatus id=an192.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gísle]</ab> add. S.</note>, Nefsteinn, Þórbiorn Crumr, Hior, ok Þórgrímr; <anchor id=a192.8>ok Biorn, faðer Geira at Lundom, f&aolig;ðor Þórkels lækniss <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Geira, <anchor id=a192.9>f. Þorkels Canoca, vinar Þorláks byscops ens Helga, es sette regolo <anchor id=a192.10>stað í Þyckva-b&oeacute;].<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=15.6><anchor id=a192.11><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Eyvindr Karpe nam land á miðle Almanna-fliótz ok Geir-landz-ár; <anchor id=a192.12>ok bió at Forse fyr vestan Moðolfs-gnúp. Syner hans <anchor id=a192.13>vóro þeir Moðolfr Smiðr, faðer þeirra Hrólfs ok Ketils, ok Ástríðar <anchor id=a192.14>Manvitz-brecku. Annarr vas Onundr, faðer Þraslaugar, móðor <anchor id=a192.15>Tyrfings, f&aolig;ðor Teitz<note place=apparatus id=an192.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Teitz]</ab> add. S.</note>.&mdash;Áðr Almanna-fliót hl&oelig;pe<note place=apparatus id=an192.5><ab type=textRef>hl&oelig;pe]</ab> leypi, vell.</note> vas þat kallat<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a192.16>Rafta-l&oeacute;kr.


<p n=16.1><anchor id=a192.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1.</ab> KETILL enn FÍFLSKE, son Iórunnar Manvitz-brecku, <anchor id=a192.18>dóttor Ketils Flatnefs: hann fór til Íslannz af <anchor id=a192.19>Suðreyjom, ok vas vel Cristenn. Hann nam land á miðle Geir-lannz-ár <anchor id=a192.20>ok Fiaðr-ár, fyr ofan Nýkoma. Ketill bió í Kirkjo-b&oeacute;.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a192.21>Þar h&aolig;fðo áðr seteð Papar; ok eige m&aoacute;tto þar heiðner menn bua. <anchor id=a192.22>Ásbi&aolig;rn vas son Ketils, f&aolig;ðor Þórsteins, f&aolig;ðor Surtz, f&aolig;ðor Sig&shy;vatz <anchor id=a193.1><pb id=pb193 n=193><note place=margin>[267: iv. II.]</note>L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz<note place=apparatus id=an193.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> S; logmannz, vell.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Kolbeins <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Guðrúnar, m. Narfa ok <anchor id=a193.2>Loðmundar Skeggja sonar<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=16.1.1><anchor id=a193.3>[S: Hildr hét dótter Ásbiarnar, móðer Þóris, f&aolig;ðor Hildar es <anchor id=a193.4>Skarpheðinn átte. Þórbi&aolig;rg hét dótter Ketels ens Fíflska; hána <anchor id=a193.5>átte Vale son Loðmundar ens Gamla.]<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=16.2><anchor id=a193.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> B&aolig;ðmóðr hét maðr, es land nam á miðle Drífanda, ok Fiaðr-ár, <anchor id=a193.7>ok upp til B&aolig;ðmóðs-hrauns<note place=apparatus id=an193.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> -horns, S; -rauns, Cd.</note>, ok bió í B&aolig;ðmóðs-tungo. Hans <anchor id=a193.8>son vas Óleifr, es Óleifs-borg es við kend; hann bió í Holte. <anchor id=a193.9>Hans son vas Vestarr, faðer Helga, f&aolig;ðor Gró, es Gl&oeacute;ðer átte.

<p n=16.3><anchor id=a193.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Eysteinn enn Digre fór af Sunn-M&oeacute;re til Íslannz. Hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a193.11>nam land fyr austan Geirlandz-&aoacute;, til mótz við Ketel enn Fíflska; <anchor id=a193.12>ok bió i Geirlande. Hans son vas Þórsteinn frá Kelldo-gnúpe.

<p n=16.4><anchor id=a193.13><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Eysteinn, son Hrana, Hildis sonar Parrax<note place=apparatus id=an193.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Paraks, S.</note>, fór or Norege til <anchor id=a193.14>Íslannz. Hann keypte land at Eysteine Digra, þau es hann hafðe <anchor id=a193.15>numet, ok kvað vesa Meðal-l&aolig;nd. Hann bió at Skarðe. Hans<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a193.16>b&aolig;rn vóro þau, Hilder; ok Þórliót, es átte Þórsteinn at <anchor id=a193.17>Keldo-gnúpe.

<p n=16.5><anchor id=a193.18><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hilder vilde f&oeacute;ra bú sítt í Kirkjo-b&oeacute; efter Ketil enn Fíflska; <anchor id=a193.19>ok hugðe, at þar m&oelig;nde heiðenn maðr bua mega. En es hann <anchor id=a193.20>kom nær at tún-garðe, varð hann bráð-dauðr. Hann liggr þar í<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a193.21>Hildis-hauge.

<pb id=pb194 n=194><note place=margin>[270: iv. 12.]</note>

<p n=17.1><anchor id=a194.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1.</ab> Hrólfr hét maðr H&oelig;ggvande; hann bió á Norð&shy;m&oeacute;re. <anchor id=a194.2>B&oeacute;r hans hét Molda-tún. Hans syner vóro <anchor id=a194.3>þeir Vémundr, ok Molda-Gnúpr, víga-menn mikler, ok iárn-smiðer. <anchor id=a194.4>Vémundr kvað þetta es hann vas í smiðjo<note place=apparatus id=an194.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es hann ... smiðjo]</ab> add. S.</note>:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a194.5>Ek bar einn af ellefo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a194.6>Bana-orð. Blástú meirr!
</lg>

<p n=17.2><anchor id=a194.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Gnúpr fór fyr víga-(sakar) þeirra br&oeacute;ðra<note place=apparatus id=an194.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeirra br&oeacute;ðra]</ab> add. S.</note> til Íslannz, ok nam <anchor id=a194.8>fyr vestan Cúða-fliót til Eyjar-(ár)<note place=apparatus id=an194.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Eyjar]</ab> vell.; mille Kuða fl. ok Eyjar-ár, S.</note>, Alfta-ver allt.&mdash;Þar lá þá vatn <anchor id=a194.9>mikit, ok alft-veiðr. Gnúpr vas mikil-menne, ok selðe land þeim <anchor id=a194.10>m&aolig;nnom es síðarr kómo út; ok varð þar fiol-bygt, áðr iarð-eldr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a194.11>rann ofan. Þá fl&oeacute;ðo aller vestr til H&aolig;fða-brecko, ok g&oelig;rðo búðer <anchor id=a194.12>á Tiallda-velle; en Vémundr Smiðr, son Sigmundar Cl&aolig;kiss<note place=apparatus id=an194.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> Cleykis, S.</note>, es <anchor id=a194.13>þar átte land, leyfðe þeim eige þar vist. Þá fóro þeir í hrossa-garð, <anchor id=a194.14>ok g&oelig;rðo þar skála<note place=apparatus id=an194.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok g. þar skála]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok s&aoacute;to þar um vettrenn. Þar féllo syner <anchor id=a194.15>Molda-Gnúps ok sialfr hann;· en Bi&aolig;rn son hans hefnde hans ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a194.16>þeirra. Bi&aolig;rn fór í Grinda-vík<note place=apparatus id=an194.6><ab type=textRef>Þar féllo ... Grinda-vík]</ab> ok geyrðiz þar ófriðr með þeim ok víga-far. En um várit efter fóro þeir Molda-Gnúpr vestr í Grinda-vík ... , S.</note>, ok staðfestesk þar.

<p n=17.3><anchor id=a194.17><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Bi&aolig;rn hafðe ner ecke kvik-fé. Þeir vóro þá full-tíða syner <anchor id=a194.18>Molda-Gnúps, Bi&aolig;rn, ok Gnúpr, Þórsteinn Hrungner, ok Þórðr <pb id=pb195 n=195><note place=margin>[271, 267: iv. 12, 11.]</note>Leggjalde<note place=apparatus id=an195.1><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þeir vóro ... Leggjalde]</ab> <anchor id=a195.1>add. S.</note>. Bi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an195.2><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Bi&aolig;rn]</ab> S; hann, H.</note> dreymðe, at berg-bue kveme at hónom, ok <anchor id=a195.2>byðe at g&oelig;ra félag við hann; enn hann iátte. Þá kom hafr til <anchor id=a195.3>geita hans lítlo síðarr&mdash;því vas hann Hafr-Bi&aolig;rn kallaðr&mdash;ok tím&shy;gaðesk <anchor id=a195.4>þá svá skiótt fé hans, at hann<note place=apparatus id=an195.3><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þóttesk iatta því, S. ok tímgaðesk ... at hann]</ab> S; hann gerðiz, H.</note> g&oelig;rðesk bæðe ríkr ok stór-auðigr. <anchor id=a195.5>Þat sá ofresk kona, at allar land-vetter fylgðo Hafr-Birne<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a195.6>þá es hann fór til þings; en Þórsteine ok Þórðe, br&oeacute;ðrom hans, <anchor id=a195.7>þá es þeir fiskðo<note place=apparatus id=an195.4><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> til veiðar ok fiskjar, S.</note>.

<p n=17.4><anchor id=a195.8><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hafr-Bi&aolig;rn átte Iórunne, stiúp-dóttor Gnúps, bróðor síns. <anchor id=a195.9><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Frá Molda-gnúp es mart stór-menne komet á Íslande, bæðe <anchor id=a195.10>byscopar ok logmenn.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=17.4.1><anchor id=a195.11>[S: Hafrbiorn átte ...: þeirra son vas Svertingr, es átte <anchor id=a195.12>Húngerðe, dóttor Þóroddz, Tungo-Oddz sonar, ok Iófríðar, Gunnars <anchor id=a195.13>dóttor. Þeirra dótter Þórbi&aolig;rg, móðer Sveinbiarnar, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a195.14>Bótolfs. Gnúpr Molda-Gnúps son átte Arnbi&aolig;rgo, Raðorms <anchor id=a195.15>dóttor, sem fyrr vas ritað. Iðunn vas dótter Molda-Gnúps, es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a195.16>átte Þióstarr á Alfta-nese: Þórmóðr vas son þeirra.]

<p n=17.5><anchor id=a195.17><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Vilbaldr hét maðr, bróðer Áskels Hnoccans: þeir vóro syner <anchor id=a195.18>Dofnials<note place=apparatus id=an195.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Dofnials]</ab> emend., see Bk. V. 9. 10; Dofnaks, vell.</note>. Hann fór af Írlande, ok hafðe skip þat es Cúðe hét. <anchor id=a195.19>Hann kom í Cúða-fliótz-ós. Hann nam Tungo-l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll á miðle <anchor id=a196.1><pb id=pb196 n=196><note place=margin>[268: iv. 11.]</note>Skaft-ár ok Holms-ár; ok bió í Bú-lande. Hans b&aolig;rn vóro þau <anchor id=a196.2>Biolan, faðer Þórsteins; ok Olvér Muðr, ok Biolloc, es átte Áslákr <anchor id=a196.3>Aur-goðe<note place=apparatus id=an196.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Aur-goðe]</ab> add. S.</note>.


<p n=18.1><anchor id=a196.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 1.</ab> Leiðolfr kappe hét maðr<note place=apparatus id=an196.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> hét m. kappe, H.</note>. Hann nam land fyr <anchor id=a196.5>austan Skaft-&aoacute; til Drífande; ok bió at Á, fyr austan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a196.6>Skaft-&aoacute; út frá Sk&aoacute;l; en annat bú átte hann á Leiðolfs-st&aolig;ðom <anchor id=a196.7>under Leifolfs-felle; ok vas þar þá mart bygða. Hann vas faðer <anchor id=a196.8>Þórunnar, móðor Hróars Tungo-goða. Hróarr átte Arngunne, <anchor id=a196.9>dóttor Hámundar, systor Gunnars at Hlíðar-enda. Þeirra b&aolig;rn <anchor id=a196.10>vóro þau Hámundr Halte, ok Ormhildr.<note place=apparatus id=an196.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þeirra b&aolig;rn ... Ormh.]</ab> add. S.</note> Vébrandr hét son Hróars<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a196.11>ok ambáttar. Hróarr tók Þórunne Brún, dóttor Brynjolfs í Hvamme <anchor id=a196.12>í Mý-dale: Þórfiðr hét son þeirra. Hróarr bió fyrst í Ásom. <anchor id=a196.13>Síðan tók hann Lóma-Gnúps land<note place=apparatus id=an196.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>land]</ab> lond, S.</note> af Eysteine, syne Þórsteins <anchor id=a196.14>Titlings, ok Auðar Eyvindar dóttor, systor þeirra Moðolfs ok <anchor id=a196.15>Branda. Þraslaug vas dótter Þórsteins Titlings, es átte Þórðr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a196.16>Freys-goðe.

<p n=18.2><anchor id=a196.17><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Onundr Tosco-bak, frænde Þórsteins-barna, skoraðe Hróar á <anchor id=a196.18>holm á Skafta-fellz-þinge, ok fell at fótom Hróare. Þórsteinn Upplendingr <anchor id=a196.19>tók Þórunne Brún, ok hafðe útan. Hróarr fór ok útan. <anchor id=a196.20>Þá drap hann Þrost berserk á holme, es nauðga vilde eiga<note place=apparatus id=an196.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eiga]</ab> add. S.</note> Sigríðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a196.21>húsfreyjo hans; en þeir Þórsteinn sættosk. Moðolfs syner vóro at <anchor id=a197.1><pb id=pb197 n=197><note place=margin>[269, 272: iv. 12, 13.]</note>víge Hróars<note place=apparatus id=an197.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Moðolfs syner ... Hróars]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok Þórer mágr þeirra, Brande frá Gnúpom, ok Steinolfr <anchor id=a197.2>bue hans. Hámundr hefnde þeirra Hróars.

<p n=18.3><anchor id=a197.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ísolfr hét maðr: hann fór út síð landnáma-tíðar, ok skoraðe <anchor id=a197.4>á Vilbald til landa eðr holm-g&aolig;ngo; en Vilbaldr vilde eige berjask, <anchor id=a197.5>ok fór braut af Bú-lande: hann átte þá land miðle Holms-ár ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a197.6>Cúða-fliótz. En Ísolfr fór þá í Búland ok átte land miðle Cúða-fliótz, <anchor id=a197.7>ok Skaft-ár. Hans son vas Rane á Rana-st&aolig;ðom; en <anchor id=a197.8>dótter Bi&aolig;rg, es átte Onundr<note place=apparatus id=an197.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Onundr]</ab> S; Eyvindr, H.</note>, son Eyvindar Carpa. Þraslaug vas <anchor id=a197.9>dótter þeirra, es átte Þórarenn son Olves í H&aolig;fða.

<p n=18.4><anchor id=a197.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hrafn Hafnar-lykill vas víkíngr mikill. Hann for til Íslannz,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a197.11>ok nam land á miðle Holms-ár, ok Eyjar-ár; ok bió í Dyn-skógom. <anchor id=a197.12>Hann visse fyrer ellz-upp-kvómo, ok f&oeacute;rðe þá bú sítt í <anchor id=a197.13>Lág-ey. Hans son vas Áslákr Orgoðe.&mdash;Þaðan ero Lág-eyingar <anchor id=a197.14>komner.

<p n=18.5><anchor id=a197.15><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Eysteinn hét maðr, son Þórsteins Dranga-karls: hann fór til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a197.16>Íslannz af Háloga-lande; ok braut skip sítt, en meiddesk sialfr <anchor id=a197.17>í viðom. Hann bygðe Fagra-dal; en kerling eina rak af skipeno í <anchor id=a197.18>Kerlingar-fi&aolig;rð&mdash;þar es nú H&aolig;fð-ár-sandr.

<p n=18.6><anchor id=a197.19><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Olvér, son Eysteins, nam land fyr austan Gríms-&aoacute;. Þar <anchor id=a197.20>hafðe enge maðr þorat at nema fyre land-v&aelig;ttom síðan Hiorleifr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a197.21>vas drepenn. Olver bió í H&aolig;fða. Hans son vas Þórarenn í <anchor id=a198.1><pb id=pb198 n=198><note place=margin>[273: iv. 13.]</note>H&aolig;fða, bróðer sam-m&oelig;ðre Halldórs, Ornolfs sonar, es M&aolig;rðr <anchor id=a198.2>Úrækja vá under H&aolig;mrom; ok Arnórs, es þeir Flose ok Kolbeinn, <anchor id=a198.3>syner Þórðar Freys-goða, v&aoacute;go á Skafta-fellz-þinge.

<p n=18.7><anchor id=a198.4><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Sigmundr Cleyker, son Onundar Bíllz, Hróars sonar Horns, <anchor id=a198.5>Bruna sonar,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a198.6>Es bragð vann á Brávelle<note place=apparatus id=an198.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hróars s. ... Brávelle]</ab> add. M&ast;.</note>,
</lg>

<p n=18.7.1><anchor id=a198.7>nam land á miðle Gríms-ár, ok Kerlingar-ár, es þá fell fyr vestan <anchor id=a198.8>H&aolig;fða. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Frá Sigmunde ero þrír byscopar komner, Þorlákr enn <anchor id=a198.9>Helge, ok Páll, ok Brandr.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>

<p n=18.8><anchor id=a198.10><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Bi&aolig;rn hét maðr auðigr ok skartz-maðr<note place=apparatus id=an198.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>skartz-m.]</ab> oflate, S.</note> mikill: hann fór til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a198.11>Íslannz af Valdrese, ok nam land á miðle Kerlingar-ár ok Hafrs-ár; <anchor id=a198.12>ok bió at Reyne. Hann átte íllt við Loðmund enn Gamla. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Frá <anchor id=a198.13>Reyni-Birne er enn Helge Þorlákr byscop komenn.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>


<p n=19.1><anchor id=a198.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>19.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Loðmundr</hi> enn Gamle nam land á miðle Hafrs-ár <anchor id=a198.15>ok Fúla-l&oelig;kjar, sem fyrr es ritið&mdash;þat hét þá Fúla-l&oeacute;kr,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a198.16>es nú es I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute; á Sólheima-sande, es skilr lannz-fiórð-unga.&mdash;Loðmundr <anchor id=a198.17>átte mart barna<note place=apparatus id=an198.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mart barna]</ab> sex sono eða fleiri, S. Vali, S.</note>. Valr hét son hans, faðer <anchor id=a198.18>Sigmundar, es átte Oddlaugo, dóttor Eyvindar ens Eyverska.

<p n=19.2><anchor id=a198.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Sumar-liðe hét annarr son Loðmundar, faðer Þórsteins Hol-munz <anchor id=a198.20>í M&aolig;rk, f&aolig;ðor Þóro, móðor Steins, f&aolig;ðor Þóro, móðor Surtz<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a198.21>ens Hvíta Skafta-stiúps; hann vas Sumarliða son. Skafte l&aolig;g&shy;(s&aolig;go)maðr<note place=apparatus id=an198.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> logmaðr, S and H.</note> <anchor id=a199.1><pb id=pb199 n=199><note place=margin>[274: iv. 13.]</note>átte Þóro síðarr an Sumar-liðe.&mdash;Þat seger í Olvus-inga-kyne<note place=apparatus id=an199.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þat s. í O.-kyne]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=19.3><anchor id=a199.2><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Vémundr hét þriðe son Loðmundar, faðer Þórk&aolig;tlo es átte <anchor id=a199.3>Þórsteinn Vífl<note place=apparatus id=an199.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Vífill, S.</note>.  Þeirra dótter vas Arnkatla, móðer Hróa ok <anchor id=a199.4>Þórdísar, es átte Steinn Brandax<note place=apparatus id=an199.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Brandax]</ab> Brandz son, S. <anchor id=a199.5>Þóra] er átte (blank), add. S.</note>: þeirra dótter Þóra.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=19.3.1><anchor id=a199.6>Are hét enn fiórðe son Loðmundar: ok Hroalldr hét enn fimte<note place=apparatus id=an199.4><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hét enn f.]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=19.4><anchor id=a199.7><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ófeigr hét son Loðmundar laun-getenn; hann átte Þras-laugo, <anchor id=a199.8>Eyvindar dóttor.

<p n=19.4.1><anchor id=a199.9>Frá hónom<note place=apparatus id=an199.5><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hónom]</ab> þeim ollom, S.</note> es mart manna komet.

<p n=19.5><anchor id=a199.10><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an199.6><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> This § S adds.</note>Nú ero ritin land-n&aoacute;m í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge; efter því sem<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a199.11>vitrer menn ok fróðer hafa sagt. Hefer í þeim fiórðunge mart <anchor id=a199.12>stór-menne veret síðan, ok þar hafa margar stórar s&aolig;gor g&oelig;rsk.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 id=en.lib4 n=IV lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">

<p n=0>IV. Here beginneth the Settlement of the <hi rend=sc>East-frith-folk Quarter</hi>, and men say this, that this Quarter was the first full settled in Iceland.

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gund-wolf Cropp</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Thore Hawk-neb, a lord <hi>or</hi> herse. He took in settlement Gund-wolf&apos;s-wick, and Gund-wolf&apos;s-fell, and Lang-ness beyond Helcund-heath, and dwelt at Fair-wick. His son was Scule-hercia, the father of Gar-laug.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Finn</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Fin-frith and Wood-frith. His son was Thor-arin, the father of Sigrod, the father of Glera-Hall.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-gar the White</hi>, the son of Hrapp, took in settlement Sand-wick from the north of Thick-ness to Wood-frith, and dwelt at Sceg-stead. His daughter was Inge-borg, whom Thor-stan the White had to wife.

<p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Alric</hi> was the brother of Hrod that came out with him. He was the father of Leot-wolf, gode of Swar-fads-dale.


<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind Weapon</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Ref [Fox] the Red</hi>, the sons of Thor-stan Thick-leg, came to Iceland from Strind in Throw-end-ham, <pb id=pb173a n=173>because they fell out with king Harold, and each of them had his own ship. Ref was driven back, and king Harold had him slain; but Ey-wind came to Weapon-frith, and took in settlement all the frith from the west of West-dale-water, and dwelt at Inner Cross-wick. His son was Thor-beorn.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Stan-beorn Cart</hi> was the name of a son of Ref the Red. He went to Iceland and put in at Weapon-frith. Ey-wind, his father&apos;s brother, gave him all the land between Weapon-frith and West-dale-water. He dwelt at Temple. His sons were these: Thor-mod Stick-bligh, that dwelt at Sun-dale; another [was] Ref of Ref-stead; the third Egil of Egil-stead, the father of Thor-arin, and of Thrast, and of Hall-beorn, and of Hall-frida, whom Thor-kell, Geiti&apos;s son, had to wife.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-wald Biolan</hi> was the sworn-brother of Ey-wind Weapon. He took land in settlement west of West-dale-water, half the dale, and all Shiel-water-dale out to Thick-ness. He dwelt at Turf-stead. His son was Is-red, the father of Gun-hilda, whom Orde, the son of As-wolf of Head, had to wife.


<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Alwe the White</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Os-wald, son of Oxen-Thore. He was a lend-man <hi>or</hi> thegen, and dwelt at Elm-dale. He fell out with earl Hacon, Grit-gard&apos;s son, wherefore he went forth to Yria, and there he died; but Thor-stan the White, his son, came to Iceland, and put into Weapon-frith in his own ship, after the settlement. He bought land of Ey-wind Weapon, and dwelt at Toft-field, <pb id=pb174a n=174>beyond Sirec-stead, certain winters before he got hold of Temple-land by this means: he called in the money he had lent to Stan-beorn Cart, but he had no means but his land to pay it; and there Thor-beorn dwelt sixty winters afterwards, and he was a wise man and of good counsel. He had to wife Ingi-borg, daughter of Hrod-gar the White. Their children were these: Thor-gils, and Thord, Ean-wend, and daughters Thor-borg and Thora. Thor-gils had to wife As-were, daughter of Thore Grout-Atlesson. Their son was Brord-Helge, that had to wife first Halla, daughter of Lytings, the son of Arne-beorn. Their son was Fighting-Bearne; he had to wife Rand-weig, the daughter of Eiric of God-dales. Their son was Sceg-Brord <hi>or</hi> Beardie-Brord, and their daughter Yngw-hild, whom Thor-stan, Hall&apos;s son, had to wife. Beardie-Brord had to wife God-run, the daughter of Þor-aren Sealing and of Hall-dora, Einar&apos;s daughter. Their children were Thore and Bearne Long-house. Thore had to wife Stan-wen, the daughter of Thor-grim the High. Their daughter was God-run, whom Flosi, Colban&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son <hi>was</hi> Bearne, the father of Bearne, that had to wife Halla, Eor-wend&apos;s daughter.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Torfe</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Lyting</hi>, two brethren, came to Iceland. Lyting took in settlement all East Weapon-frith-strands, Bead-were&apos;s-dale, and Fair-dale, and dwelt at Cross-wick, and lived there a few winters. From them are come the <hi rend=sc>Weapon-frith-men</hi>. Geite, the father of Thor-kell, was the son of Lyting.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-fin</hi> was the name of a man that first dwelt at Sceg-stead by the rede <hi>or</hi> counsel of Thord-halm. His son was Thor-stan the <pb id=pb175a n=175>Fair that slew Einar, the son of Thore, Grout-Atle&apos;s son, and his [Thor-stan&apos;s] two brothers Thor-kell and Hedin, that slew Thor-gils, the father of Brord-Helga.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Torve</hi> took in settlement all Lithe, out from Os-fells and up to Hwan-water, and dwelt at Force-field. His son Thor-wald, father of Thor-gar, father of Hall-gar, father of Rap of Force-field.

<p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hacon</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement all Iockle&apos;s-dale from the west of Iockle&apos;s-river. His daughter was Thor-borg, that the sons of Bryn-wolf the Old, Gund-beorn and Hall-grim, had to wife. There was a tag of land not taken in settlement that lay between Thor-stan Torfe and Hacon; they gave it to the Temple, and it is now called Temple-tag.

<p n=3.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shield-wolf</hi>, We-mund&apos;s son, the brother of Berdle-Care, took in settlement Iockle-dale east of Iockle-river, and up from Cnefils-dale-water, and dwelt at Shield-wolf-stead. His children were Thor-stan, that had to wife Fast-ny, daughter of Bryn-wolf the Old, and Sigrid, whom Ozor, Bryn-wolf&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son was Berse, after whom Bersi-stead is named.

<p n=3.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thord Thwart</hi>, the son of Thor-wolf Halm, the brother of Helge Buna-haus. He took in settlement all Tongue-land between Iockle&apos;s-river and Loch-fleet out beyond Rang-river. His son was Thor-wolf Halm, that had to wife God-rid, daughter of Bryn-wolf the Old. Their son was Thord Thwart, the father of Thor-ord, the father of Brand.

<p n=3.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ozur Brisket</hi> took land in settlement between Worm&apos;s-river <pb id=pb176a n=176>and Rang-water.  He had to wife God-ny, the daughter of Bryn-wolf. Their son was As-mund, the father of Mord.


<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Grout-Atle</hi>, the sons of Thore Thidrand, went forth out of Were-dale to Iceland, and took land in settlement in Fleet-dale before Bryn-wolf came out. Cetil took in settlement both banks of Lake-fleet from the west of Fleet-water, between Hang-force-river and Worm&apos;s-river.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Cetil went abroad and was with We-thorm, the son of We-mund the Old. Then he bought of We-thorm Erne-heid, daughter of earl Os-beorn Skerry-blesa, whom Holm-fast, We-thorm&apos;s son, had taken captive; what time Grim, We-thorm&apos;s sister&apos;s son, slew earl Os-beorn in the Southreys. Cetil Thrym bought Erne-heid dearer by two shares than the price We-thorm priced her,&ast; but before she and Cetil went to Iceland, Erne-heid found much silver under the roots of a tree, and hid it from Cetil till he took her to wife. They came out to Iceland together and dwelt at Erne-heid&apos;s-stead. Their son was Thidrand, the father of Cetil of Niard-wick.

<p>S&ast;: Then Cetil made a bridal for her, and after that Erne-heid found much buried treasure under a tree-root. Then Cetil offered to take her home to her kinsmen, but she chose to stay with him. <hi>See note</hi>, Dropl. ch. 1.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Grout-Atle took in settlement the east strand of all Lake-fleet between Gill and Field-ness, west of Oxen-beck. His sons were these: Thor-beorn and Thori, that had to wife As-wera, Bryn-wolf&apos;s daughter.


<pb id=pb177a n=177><p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-gar</hi>, West-here&apos;s son, was the name of a man of birth. He had three sons, and one of them was Bryne-wolf the Old; the second was Æw-here the Old; the third was Here-wolf. <corr sic=Their>They</corr> all went to Iceland, each in their own ship.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Bryne-wolf came in his ship into Ash-fiord, and took in settlement land down from the Fell, all Fleet-dale down from Hang-force-water on the west, and down from Gils-water on the east, and all Slip-dale, and also the field or plain to Ey-wind&apos;s-river, and took much of the settlement of Una, Gard-here&apos;s son, and peopled it there with his kinsmen and kinsmen-in-law. He had ten children; and afterwards he took to wife Helga, whom his brother Here-wolf had had to wife, and they had three children. Their son was Ozur, the father of Berse, the father of Holm-stan [Amala-stan], the father of Urækia, the father of Holm-stan.

<p n=5.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Æw-here the Old</hi> was the name of a man, the brother of Bryne-wolf. He came out to Iceland and into Reyd-frith, and went up over the fell. Bryne-wolf gave him all Slip-dale down from Gils-water. He dwelt at Arnold-stead. He had two sons and three daughters.

<p n=5.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Is-rod</hi> [S: As-rod] was the name of a man that took to wife As-were, the daughter of Hare-wolf, the brother&apos;s daughter and the step-daughter of Bryne-wolf. There came with her [as her portion <hi>or</hi> dowry] all the land between Gil-water and Ey-wind&apos;s-river. They dwelt at Cetil-stead. Their son was Thor-wald Hol-barc [Hollow-weasand], the father of Thor-berg, the father of Haf-Leot, the father <pb id=pb178a n=178>of Thor-hard Bowl. The daughter of Hol-barc was Thor-wen, whom Thor-beorn, Grout-Atle&apos;s son, had to wife. Another was As-trid, the mother of As-beorn Shag-head, the father of Thor-arin of Seyd-frith, the father of As-beorn, the father of Col-sceg the historian, and of Ingi-laf, the mother of Hall, the father of Fin the Speaker of the Laws.


<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Raven-kell</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Raven. He came out late in the time of the settlement. He stayed the first winter at Broad-dale, but in the spring he went up over the fell.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He baited in Slip-dale, and there he slept. Then he dreamed that a man came to him, and bade him get up and go away as fast as he could. He woke up and went away, and when he was gone a short way, the whole hill fell down and overwhelmed a boar and a bull which he had.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Afterwards he took in settlement Raven-kell&apos;s-dale, and dwelt at Stan-red-stead. His son was As-beorn, the father of Helge and of Thore, the father of Raven-kell <hi>gode</hi>, the father of Swegen-beorn.


<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Une the Danish</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>the Unborn</hi> [posthumous <hi>or</hi> Cæsarian], the son of Gard-here that found Iceland, came to Iceland by the counsel of king Harold Fairhair, and was minded to subdue the land under him, and the king had promised to make him earl there when he had done so. Une landed at the place that is now called Une-mouth, and housed himself there. He took in settlement the land for his own estate, from the south of Lake-fleet the whole country side to Une&apos;s-beck.

<pb id=pb179a n=179><p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But when the men of the land came to know what he meant to do they began to be ruffled with him, and would not sell him any livestock nor food; wherefore he was not able to maintain himself there. Then Une went away thence and came into South Elfet&apos;s-frith; but he was not able to settle down with his household there. Then he departed from the east with twelve men, and came in the winter to the house of Leod-wolf the Champion of Shaw-wharf. He received them. Une set his mind upon Thor-wen, Leod-wolf&apos;s daughter, and she was with child in the spring. Then Une tried to steal away with his men, but Leod-wolf rode after him, and they met by Flangi-stead and fought, for Une would not go back with Leod-wolf. There fell some of Une&apos;s men; and in the end he went back unwilling, for Leod-wolf would have him take the woman to wife, and set up his household there, and take the inheritance after him. A little later Une stole away at a time when Leod-wolf was away from home; but Leod-wolf rode after him as soon as he was aware of it, and they met by Calf-pits. He [Leod-wolf] was then so wroth that he slew Une and all those that were with him.

<p n=7.2.1>The son of Une and Thor-wen was Hrod-gar <hi>gode</hi> of Tongue. He took all the inheritance of Leod-wolf, and was the most powerful of men. He had to wife Arn-gund, the daughter of Heah-mund, <hi>and</hi> sister of Gund-here of Lith-end. Their son was Ha-mund the Halt, the greatest of man-slayers. Tiorwe the Mocker and Gund-here were Hrod-gar&apos;s sister&apos;s sons.

<p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Tiorwe asked for As-trid Man-wit&apos;s-brink, the daughter of Mod-wolf, <pb id=pb180a n=180>to wife; but her brethren, Cetil and Hrod-wolf, would not give him the woman, but gave her to Thore, Cetil&apos;s son, to wife. Then Tiorwe drew their likenesses on the wall of the gong, and every evening when Hrod-gar&apos;s folk went to gong, he would spit in the face of Tiorwe&apos;s likeness and kiss&apos;d <sic>her&apos;s</sic>, till Hrod-gar scraped them off the wall. After that Tiorwe carved them on the haft <hi>or</hi> handle of his knife, and quoth these verses:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>I painted Thore&apos;s young wife on the wall:
    <l>Now I have cut her likeness on the haft of my knife.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79, No. 1. <hi>The verses are sophisticated by the later editor.</hi>]


<p n=7.3.1>Whereof came the slaughter of Hrod-gar and his sister&apos;s sons.


<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-kell the Full-sage</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement all Niard-wick, and dwelt there. His daughter was Theod-hild [MS.: Thor-hild], whom Æw-here the Old had to wife, and their daughter was Yngw-hild, the mother of Cetil of Niard-wick, the son of Thidrande.

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Winter-lide</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Arin-beorn [Arn-beorn], the son of An-laf Long-neck, the brother of Lyting, and of Thor-stan Torfi, and of Thor-beorn of Erne-holt. An-laf Long-neck was the son of Beorn Whale-flitch. Winter-lide took in settlement [land over] Borg-frith, and dwelt there.

<pb id=pb181a n=181><p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thore Line</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Broad-wick, and dwelt there. His sons were these: Gund-stan and Swegenung.

<p n=8.3.1>Now beginneth henceforward the settlement according to the saying of Col-sceg.


<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Clegge</hi> [hay-bottle] first took in settlement House-wick, and dwelt there. His son was Are, from whom the <hi rend=sc>House-wick-men</hi> are come.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lod-mund the Old</hi> was the name of a man, and another was Beo-wolf, his sworn-brother. They came to Iceland from Thule-ness in Vors. Lod-mund was greatly possessed by a fiend [S: much strength-eked, and a great wizard]. He cast his porch-pillars overboard while he was at sea, and said that he would settle where they were drifted [ashore]. And the sworn-brethren made East-frith, and Lod-mund took in settlement Lod-mund-frith, and dwelt there three winters [S: that winter]. Then he heard of his porch-pillars being in the south of the country. And with that he put on board his ship all that he had.

<p n=9.2.1>And when the sail was hoisted he laid him down, commanding that no man was to name him. And when he had been a little while, there was a great rumbling noise, and they saw a great earth-slip fall upon the homestead which Lod-mund had set up and dwelt in. After that he sat up and spake: &lsquo;I lay this spell <hi>or</hi> doom, that no ship shall ever come back safe from sea that sails from this haven.&rsquo;

<p n=9.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> He held his course south of Cape Horn, and west by Heor-laf&apos;s-head, <pb id=pb182a n=182>and landed somewhat more to the west. Then he took land in settlement where the pillars were come to land, between Goat-river and Foul-beck, which is now called Iockle-river on Sun-ham-sand. He dwelt at Lod-mund&apos;s-combe, which is now called Sun-ham.

<p n=9.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Now at that time, when Lod-mund was grown old, Thrase dwelt at Shaws. He was also a wizard, and they were ill neighbours, he and Lod-mund. One morning Thrase saw a great flood of water falling down; but he kept off the waters by his witchcraft, driving them east upon Sun-ham. Lod-mund&apos;s thrall looked forth, and told him that a sea was falling upon the land from the north. Lod-mund was at that time sightless, and he said to the thrall, &lsquo;Bring me here in a bilge-basin a little of what thou callest the sea.&rsquo; He did so. Then Lod-mund said, &lsquo;I do not think it is the sea. Do thou take me down to the water, and put the heel of my staff in the water.&rsquo; He did so. There was a ring on the staff. Lod-mund held the staff with his two hands, and bit the ring, and straightway all the waters began to fall to the west of Shaw. And so each of them [Lod-mund and Thrase] kept the waters away from his land, till they met at a certain chine; and agreed upon this, that the river should fall there to the sea at the place where the course was shortest. In this flood of waters Sun-ham-sand was formed. It is the boundary of the Quarter, and Iockle-river runs through the midst of the sand.

<p n=9.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lod-mund&apos;s</hi> son was Summer-lide, the father of Thor-stan Hollow-mouth, the father of Thora, the mother of Stan Brand-ax&apos;s son, the father of Thora, whom Skafte <hi>or</hi> Shafto the Law-speaker had to wife.


<pb id=pb183a n=183><p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beo-wolf</hi>, the sworn-brother of Lod-mund, took in settlement all Seethe-frith, and dwelt there all his life. He gave his daughter Helga to An the Strong, and there came home with her [as marriage portion] all the north strands of Seethe-frith up to West-dale-water. But Is-wolf was the name of Beo-wolf&apos;s son. He dwelt there afterwards, and from him are the <hi rend=sc>Seethe-frith-folk</hi> come.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind</hi> was the name of a man that came out to Iceland with Bryne-wolf, and afterwards flitted to Mew-frith, and dwelt there. His son was Raven, that sold Mew-frith-land to Thor-kettle Clack. From him the <hi rend=sc>Clack Family</hi> is come.

<p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Egill the Red</hi> was the name of a man that took North-frith in settlement, and dwelt out at Ness. His son was An-laf, from whom the <hi rend=sc>Men of Ness</hi> are come.

<p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Frey-stan the Fair</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Sand-wick, and Bard&apos;s-ness, and Cave-frith, and Wood-frith, and dwelt at Bard-ness. From him are come the <hi rend=sc>Men of Sand-wick</hi>, and the <hi rend=sc>Men o&apos; Wood-frith</hi>, and the <hi rend=sc>Men of Cave-frith</hi>.

<p n=10.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thore the Tall</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Crum</hi> were the names of two men that came from Vors to Iceland, and when they came and took land, Thore took in settlement Cross-wick and the land between Gerpi and Reyd-frith. Thence are the <hi rend=sc>Cross-wick-men</hi> come.

<p n=10.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> But Crum took land in settlement in Goat-ness as far as Fern-ness, but all outside, both Shroudey and the other out isles, and their lands <hi>or</hi> estates the other side of Tern-ness. From him are the <hi rend=sc>Crum-lings</hi> come.

<pb id=pb184a n=184><p n=10.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Æw-here was first in Reyd-frith before he went up over the fell, and Bryne-wolf dwelt in Ash-frith before he went up to settle Fleet-dale, as it is written before.

<p n=10.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>We-mund</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement all Fa-scrud&apos;s-frith, and dwelt there all his life. His son was Aul-mod, from whom the <hi rend=sc>Aul-mod-lings</hi> are come.


<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-heard the Old</hi> was Temple-gode in Throwend-ham, inside on the More. He was moved to go to Iceland, and he took down the temple, and carried with him the mould and the porch-pillars. And he put into Stead-frith, and laid the hallowing <hi>or</hi> sacredness of More upon the whole frith, and suffered nothing to be put to death there save tame cattle. He dwelt there all his life, and from him are the <hi rend=sc>Stead-frith-men</hi> come.

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Healte</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Sholto</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Cleve-land and all Broad-dale up from it. His son was Col-grim, from whom many men are come.

<p n=11.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Here-wolf</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement all out to Whales-ness-slip. His son was Ey-wind Weapon, that the <hi rend=sc>Weaponlings</hi> are come from.

<p n=11.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Here-wolf</hi>, the brother of Bryne-wolf, took in settlement Hay-dale-land, north of Tinder-dale <hi>or</hi> Flint-dale-water, and out to Worms-river. His son was Ozur, from whom the <hi rend=sc>Broad-dale-men</hi> are come.

<p n=11.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Shield-wolf</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement all Streit [Strath] beyond the Peak on the other side to Oyce, and to Shield-wolf&apos;s-ness hard by Fair-dale-water in Broad-dale. His son <pb id=pb185a n=185>was Halig, that dwelt there afterwards. From him is the <hi rend=sc>Halega Family</hi> come.

<p n=11.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Theod-rec</hi> was the name of a man. He first took in settlement all Broad-dale, but he bolted away thence for fear of Bryne-wolf, and down to Bear-frith; and there took in settlement all the nether strand of Bear-frith, and on the south over By-land&apos;s-ness and on to Red-slip on the other side, and there he dwelt three winters at the place now called Hall. Afterwards Beorn the Tall bought the lands of him, and from him are the <hi rend=sc>Bear-frith-folk</hi> come.

<p n=11.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn Singe-horn</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement Nether Elfet&apos;s-frith inward from Red-slips and Singe-horn-dale.

<p n=11.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Drum-leg</hi> was the name of a kinsman of Bead-were the White, and went with him to Iceland. He took land in settlement from out of Lear-voe to Whales-ness-slip. His son was Coll the Grey, the father of Thor-stan, the father of Thor-grim of Borg-frith, the father of Stein-unn, whom bishop Gizor had to wife.


<p n=12.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bead-were the White</hi> was the son of Thor-laf Mid-lung, the son of Bead-were Snow-thrim, the son of Thor-laf Whale-fringe, the son of An, the son of Erne Horn, the son of king Thore, the son of Swine-Bead-were, the son of king Caun, the son of king Saulge, the son of king Hrod-wolf o&apos; the Rock, the son of Swace the Giant from the north of Dofre <hi>or</hi> Dover&mdash;[king Hrod-wolf had to wife Go, after whom the mouth is called Goe; she was sister to Gor and Nor, after <pb id=pb186a n=186>whom Norway was called. <hi>This is a gloss</hi>]&mdash;and Brand Ean-wend, his kinsman, went from Vors to Iceland, and put into South Elfet&apos;s-frith.

<p n=12.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Bead-were took in settlement inward from Lear-voe all the dales that lie there and on the other side to Mull, and dwelt at Temple. He reared there a great temple.

<p>The son of Bead-were was Thor-stan, that had to wife Thor-dis, the daughter of Ozur Keilis-elg, the son of Hrod-laug. Their son was Hall o&apos; Side, that had to wife Ioreid, the daughter of Thidrande, and from him is a great family come. Their son was Thor-stan, the son of Amund, the father of Gud-run.

<p n=12.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Brand Ean-wend</hi> took land north of Mull, Cam&apos;s-dale and Melracca-ness [White Fox-ness], and inward up to Hammer-river; and there are many men come from him.


<p n=13.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thord Beard</hi> [<hi>Pedigree</hi>, see Bk. I. 4. 2] took in settlement all the land in the Wash north of Iockle-river, between it and Wash-heath, and dwelt at By ten winters; but when he heard of his porch-pillars being at Lear-voe down below the Heath <hi>or</hi> Moor, then he sold his land to Wolf-leot the Lawman, who came out thither to the Wash, the son of Thora, the daughter of Cetil Haurda-Care, the son of As-lac Beaver-Care, the son of An, the son of Erne Horn. Thor dwelt some winters after at Wash, after he heard news of his porch-pillars. But when Wolf-leot was sixty years old he went to Norway, and was there three winters. There he and Thor-laf the Sage, his mother&apos;s brother, <pb id=pb187a n=187>made the constitution that was afterwards called <hi>Wolf-Leot&apos;s Laws</hi>. But when he came back to Iceland the All-Moot was established, and ever after men had but one law here all over the country.

<p n=13.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Leg</hi>, the son of Beorn Blue-tooth, came out of the Southreys to Iceland, and took in settlement all the lands north of Cape Horn to Iockle-river in the Wash, and dwelt at Bead-were&apos;s-holt three winters. Then he sold his land and went back to the Southreys.


<p n=14.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Regin-wald earl of More</hi>, the son of Ey-stan Glumra, the son of Iwar the earl of the Upland-men, the son of Half-dan the Old, had to wife Ragin-hild, the daughter of Hrod-wolf Nefia. Their son was Iwar, that fell in the Southreys [Hebrides] with king Harold Fairhair.

<p n=14.1.1>Another was Walker Hrod-wolf, that won Northmandy. From him are the <hi>earls of R&umacr;da</hi> [Rouen] come and the <hi>kings of the English</hi>.

<p n=14.1.2>The third was earl Thore the Silent, that had to wife Alofa Season-betterer, the daughter of king Harold Fairhair. Their daughter was Berg-leod, the mother of earl Hacon the Mighty.

<p n=14.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Regin-wald had three bastard sons: one called Hrod-laug, the second Einar, the third Hallad, that turned himself out of the earldom in the Orkneys. And when Regin-wald heard of this, he called to him his sons, and asked which of them would go to the Orkneys; but Thore bade him settle as to whether he should go or not. The earl <pb id=pb188a n=188>said he did well, but that he must take the earldom [of More] after his father. Then Hrod-wolf came forward and offered to go. Regin-wald said that he was well fitted to go by reason of his strength and bravery; but he said that he thought that there was too much adventure in his nature to allow him to sit down quietly in the earldom. Then Hrod-laug came forward and asked if he wished him to go. Regin-wald said that he would never be an earl, &lsquo;thou hast no stomach of war in thee. Thy way shall lie out to Iceland, and thou shalt be a man of rank, and blessed in thy family; but thy fate doth not lie here.&rsquo; Then Einar came forward, and said, &lsquo;Let me go to the Orkneys, and I will promise thee that which thou wilt like best of all things, to wit, that I will never come back into thy sight.&rsquo; Said the earl, &lsquo;I am well pleased for thee to go away, but I have little hope in thee, for thy mother&apos;s kin are all thrall-born.&rsquo; After that Einar went into the west, and subdued the Orkneys under him, as it is told in the <hi>History</hi> of him.

<p>Hrod-laug went to king Harold and was with him for a while, for he and his father could not get on well after this.

<p n=14.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Afterwards Hrod-laug went forth to Iceland by the counsel of king Harold, having with him his wife and his son. He made land east of Horn, and then cast overboard his porch-pillars, and they came ashore in Horn-frith; but he was driven off away westward round the land, and now he had a hard voyage, and ran short of water. They came ashore west in Lear-voe at the Ness, and there he stayed the first winter. Then he heard of his porch-pillars, and went to the coast to <pb id=pb189a n=189>where they were. He stayed the second winter under Ing-wolf&apos;s-fell. Then he went eastward into Horn-frith, and took in settlement the land east of Cape Horn to Fold-water, and at first dwelt under Pass-brink in Horn-frith, but afterwards at Broad-bowster in Fell&apos;s-wharf. He had parted then with the lands that lay north of Borg-haven; but he owned to the day of his death the lands that were south of Haw-thorn-fence-mull. Hrod-laug was a great chief, and kept up friendship with king Harold, but never went abroad [to Norway] again. [M: And he never went to see his father, earl Regin-wald, because he was not friendly with his step-mother.] And the king sent him [M: treasures on the day he died] a sword, and an ale-horn, and a gold ring that weighed 5 ozs. This sword Coll, the son of Hall o&apos; Side, afterwards had, but Col-sceg the Wise had seen the horn.

<p n=14.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hrod-laug was the father of Ozur Ceilis-Eik, that had to wife Gro, the daughter of Thord Bad-heart. Their daughter was Thor-dis, the mother of Hall o&apos; Side. Another son of Hrod-laug was Hrod-wald, the father of Oht-here Whale-roe [Spermaceti].

<p n=14.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil</hi> was the name of a man to whom Hrod-laug sold Horn-frith-stead, from west of the Horn and inland to Hammer [Cliff]. He dwelt at Middle-fell. From him are the <hi rend=sc>Horn-frith-men</hi> come.

<pb id=pb190a n=190><p n=14.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ead-wine the Red</hi> bought land of Hrod-laug, out from Hammer and on the other side to Wood-ford. He dwelt at Temple-fell, and reared a great temple there. From him are the <hi rend=sc>Men of Temple-fell</hi> come.

<p n=14.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wolf the Worsh</hi> bought land of Hrod-laug, south from Hoan-rock-river to Horn-fence-mull, and dwelt at Horn-fell first of all men. From him are the <hi rend=sc>Worsh-men</hi> come.

<p n=14.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Afterwards Wolf flitted his homestead to Papyli [<hi>the place of Irish papae</hi>], and dwelt at Broad-bowster, and there is his barrow, and also Thor-gar&apos;s howe. Thor-gar was the son of Worsh-wolf, and dwelt at Temple in Papyli.

<p n=14.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Squint</hi> bought land of Hrod-laug, all from Wood-bord south over Mire up to Horn-quarry-river. His son was West-mere, from whom the <hi rend=sc>Mire-men</hi> or <hi rend=sc>Fen-men</hi> are come.

<p n=14.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thord Evil-heart</hi> [was] the son of Ey-wind Oak-crook, the son of Helge, the son of Helge, the son of Beorn Buna [<hi>line probably lost</hi>]. He ran his ship ashore on Broad-water-sand. Hrod-laug gave him land between Iockle-water and Fold-river. He dwelt under Fell over against Broad-water. His sons were these: Erne the Strong, that had a feud with Thor-dis, Earl&apos;s daughter, the sister of Hrod-laug, and Ey-wind the Smith. His daughters were these: Groa, whom Ozur had to wife, and Thor-dis, the mother of Thor-borg, the mother of Thor-dis, the mother of Thord Evil-heart, that slew Slaughter-Scuta.


<p n=15.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>As-beorn</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Os-beorn</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Heyang Beorn, lord <hi>or</hi> herse of Sogn. He was the son of Helge, the <pb id=pb191a n=191>son of Helge, the son of Beorn Buna. He died in the sea of Iceland as he was on his way out; but <hi rend=sc>Thor-gerd</hi>, his wife, reached Iceland and their sons with her.

<p n=15.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Now it was held law, that a woman should not take in settlement more land than a quhae <hi>or</hi> heifer of two years old could go round on a spring day from sunrise to sunset, a half-stalled neat, and well kept. Wherefore Thor-gerd led her heifer under Toft-fell a short way from Fold-river in the south, and into Kid-point, hard by Iockle&apos;s-fell on the west.

<p n=15.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Then Thor-gerd took in settlement land over all Ing-wolf&apos;s-head-wharf, between Fold-river and Iockle-river, and dwelt at Sand-fell. Her son was Ozur of Bank-holt, and the elder was We-thorm, the father of Thor-rid Temple-priestess. Ozur was the father of Thord Freys <hi>gode</hi>. Alf-heid was the mother of Thord Freys <hi>gode</hi> and Thor-rid Temple-priest.

<p n=15.3.1>[S: <hi>Double text.</hi> As-beorn went forth to Iceland, but died at sea, and Thor-gerd, his wife and her sons, came out to Iceland, and took in settlement all Ing-wolf&apos;s-head-wharf between Fold-water and Iockle-river, and she dwelt at Sand-fell, and Gud-laug, the son of her and Os-beorn, after her. From him are come the <hi rend=sc>Sand-fell-men</hi>. Another son of theirs was Thor-gils, from whom the <hi rend=sc>Hnap-fell-men</hi> are come. The third Ozur, the father of Thord Frey&apos;s gode <hi>or</hi> priest, from whom many men are come.]

<p n=15.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Helge</hi> was the name of another son of Heyang Beorn. He went <pb id=pb192a n=192>to Iceland, and dwelt at Red-beck by rede of Thor-gerd of Snow-fell. His son was Hild, whence the <hi rend=sc>Red-beck-men</hi> are come from.

<p n=15.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bard</hi> [S: <hi rend=sc>Thord</hi>] was the name of the third son of Heyang Beorn, who is spoken of before [Bk. III. 17]. He first took in settlement Bard-dale in the north, but afterwards went south and over the pass of Good Hope by Bard-gate, and took in settlement all Fleets-wharf, and dwelt at Peak. He was called Beorn of the Peak. His sons were these: Thor-stan, and Sig-mund, and Egil, and Gisle, Neb-stan, Thor-beorn Crum, Heor, and Thor-grim, and Beorn, the father of Gar of Grove, the father of Thor-kell Leech.

<p n=15.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind Carpe</hi> took land in settlement between All-men&apos;s-fleet and Gore-land&apos;s-water, and dwelt at Force, west of Mod-wolf&apos;s-peak. His sons were these&mdash;Mod-wolf Smith, the father of these: Calf and Cetil, and of As-trid Man-wit&apos;s-brink. Another was Ean-wend, the father of Thras-laug, the mother of Tyrfing, the father of Tait. Before All-men&apos;s-fleet sprung [out to sea] it was called Raft-beck.


<p n=16.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil the Fool</hi> [Cathal?], the son of Ior-wen Man-wit&apos;s-brink, the daughter of Cetil Flat-neb. He went to Iceland from the Southreys, and was a good Christian. He took in settlement land between Gore-land-water and Feather-water, above Ness-come. Cetil dwelt at Kirkby. The <hi>papae</hi> had been settled there before, and heathen men might not dwell there.

<p>As-beorn was the son of Cetil, the father of Thor-stan, the father of <pb id=pb193a n=193>Swart, the father of Lawman Sigh-wat, the father of Colban, the father of Gud-run, the mother of Narfi, and Lod-mund Scegs-son.

<p n=16.1.1>[S: Hild was the name of As-beorn&apos;s daughter, the mother of Thore, the father of Hild, whom Sharp-Hedin had to wife. Thor-borg was the name of the daughter of Cetil the Fool. Wale, the son of Lodmund the Old, had her to wife.]

<p n=16.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bead-mod</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement between Drift and Feather-water, and up to Bead-mod&apos;s lava <hi>or</hi> rawn, and dwelt at Bead-mod&apos;s-tongue.  His son was An-laf, after whom An-laf&apos;s Castle is named. He dwelt at Holt. His son was West-here, the father of Helge, the father of Groa, whom Gloede had to wife.

<p n=16.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-stan the Fat</hi> came from South More to Iceland. He took land in settlement east of Gore-land-water till he marched with Cetil the Fool, and dwelt at Gore-land. His son was Thor-stan of Well-peak.

<p n=16.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-stan</hi>, the son of Hrane, the son of Hild Parrack, came from Norway to Iceland. He bought land from Ey-stan the Fat, which he had taken in settlement, and called it Middle-land. He dwelt at Pass. His children were these: Hilde and Thor-leot, whom Thor-stan of Well&apos;s-peak had to wife.

<p n=16.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hilde wished to flit his household to Kirkby after Cetil the Fool [died], thinking that a heathen man might dwell there; but when he drew nigh to the house-garth he suddenly fell down dead. There he lies in <hi>Hilde&apos;s howe</hi>.


<pb id=pb194a n=194><p n=17.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-wolf Hewer</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Slasher</hi> was the name of a man. He dwelt at North More, and his homestead was called Mould-ton. His sons were these: We-mund and Mould-peak, great fighters, and blacksmiths both. We-mund quoth this verse [to his brother] while he was at the smithy working:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>I bore alone from eleven men
    <l>The fame of slaying. Blow harder thou!
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 361.]


<p n=17.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Peak came to Iceland by reason of the manslaughter he and his brother had wrought, and took in settlement land west of Cuda-fleet, as far as the Isle-water and all Elfet&apos;s-haunt. There was a great mere there then, and a wild-swan chase. Peak was a man of power, and sold land to them that came out later; and that place was thickly settled before the earth-fire [eruption] ran down over it. Then they all fled westward to Head-brink, and set up booths with tilts at Tilt-field <hi>or</hi> Tent-field. But We-mund the Smith, the son of Sig-mund Cleek, who then owned the land there, would not let him have quarters there. Then they went into Horse-garth and built a hall there, and sat down there through the winter. There fell the sons of Mould-peak and himself also, but Beorn, his son, avenged them; and then Beorn went west to Grind-wick, and took up his abode there. [S: And there arose quarrels among them and man-slaughters there. But the next spring Mould-peak and his son went west to Grind-wick.]

<p n=17.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Beorn had almost no live-stock. Then were the sons of Mould-peak full grown&mdash;Beorn and Peak, Thor-stan Hrungne, and Thord <pb id=pb195a n=195>Layer. Beorn dreamed one night that a Rock-man [giant] came to him and asked him to be his partner <hi>or</hi> fellow, and he thought good to agree to this. A little after this there came a buck to his she-goats. Hence he was called Buck-Beorn. And then his stock throve so fast that he grew mighty and very wealthy. A woman with second-sight used to see all the wights <hi>or</hi> spirits of the land following Buck-Beorn when he went to the moot; but they would follow Thor-stan and Thord, his brethren, when they went [hunting <hi>or</hi>] fishing.

<p n=17.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Buck-Beorn had to wife Ior-wen, the step-daughter of Peak his brother.

<p>From Mould-peak are many great men come in Iceland, both bishops and lawmen.

<p n=17.4.1>[S: Buck-Beorn had to wife [<hi>blank</hi>]. Their son was Swerting, that had to wife Hun-gerd, the daughter of Thor-ord, the son of Ord o&apos; Tongue and of Io-frida, Gun-here&apos;s daughter. Their daughter was Thor-borg, the mother of Swegen-beorn, the father of Bot-olf.

<p>Peak, Mould-peak&apos;s son, had to wife Arin-borg, Rathorm&apos;s daughter, as it is written before.

<p>Id-wen was a daughter of Mould-peak, whom Thiost-here of Elfet&apos;s-ness had to wife. Thor-mod was their son.]

<p n=17.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wil-bald</hi> was the name of a man, the brother of As-kell Hnockan. They were the sons of Duf-nial. He came from Ireland, and had the ship that was called Cude [ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ]. He put into Cude-fleet-mouth. He took in settlement all Tongue lands between Shaft-water <pb id=pb196a n=196>and Holm-river, and dwelt at By-land. His children were these: Beolan, the father of Thor-stan, and Olwe Mouth, and Biolloc, whom Aslac Aur-gode had to wife.


<p n=18.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Leod-wolf the Champion</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement land from east of Shaft-water to Drift, and dwelt at River east of Shaft-water, out from Bowl; and another homestead he had at Leod-wolf-stead under Leod-wolf&apos;s-fell, and the land there was much dwelt in at that time. Leod-wolf was the father of Thor-wen, the mother of Hrod-gar the <hi>gode</hi> of Tongue. Hrod-gar had to wife Arn-gund, daughter of Ha-mund, the sister of Gun-here of Lith-end. Their children were these: Ha-mund the Halt and Orm-hild. We-brand was the name of a son of Hrod-gar and a bond-woman. Hrod-gar carried off Thor-wen Brow, the daughter of Bryne-wolf of Hwam in Midge-dale. Thor-fin was the name of their son. Hrod-gar dwelt first at Ridges. Afterwards he took Lom-peak-land from Ey-stan, the son of Thor-arin Titling and of Aud, Ey-wind&apos;s daughter, sister of Mod-wolf and Brand. Thras-laug was the daughter of Thor-stan Titling, whom Thord Frey&apos;s gode <hi>or</hi> priest had to wife.

<p n=18.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ean-wend Mail-back, the kinsman of Thor-stan&apos;s children, challenged Hrod-gar to wager of battle at Shaft-fell-moot, and fell at Hrod-gar&apos;s feet. Thor-stan the Uplander carried off Thor-wen Brow, and took her abroad. Hrod-gar also went abroad; and there he slew in wager of battle Throst, a bear-sark, that wished to take his wife Sig-rid from him against his will. But he and Thor-stan made peace. Mod-wolf&apos;s <pb id=pb197a n=197>sons, and Thore their kinsman-in-law, Brand of Peak and Stan-wolf his neighbour, were at the slaying of Hrod-gar. Ha-mund avenged Hrod-gar and his fellows.

<p n=18.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Is-wolf</hi> was the name of a man that came out hither late in the time of the settlement, and challenged Wil-bald to give him land, or fight a wager of battle with him; but Wil-bald would not fight, and went abroad out of By-land. At that time he owned the land between Holm-water and Cude-fleet. But now Is-wolf went to By-land, and he owned the land between Cude-fleet and Shaft-water. His son was Ranig of Ranig-stead, and his daughter was Borg, whom Ean-wend, the son of Ey-wind Carp, had to wife. Thras-laug was their daughter, whom Thor-aren, the son of Olwe of Head, had to wife.

<p n=18.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Raven Haven-key</hi> was a great wicking <hi>or</hi> warrior. He went to Iceland, and took land in settlement between Holm-water and Ey-river, and dwelt at Din-shaw. He knew of the eruption beforehand, and flitted his household to Lowey. His son was Aslac Aur-gode, from whom the <hi rend=sc>Lagey-men</hi> are come.

<p n=18.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-stan</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Thor-stan Drang-carle. He came to Iceland from Haloga-land, and wrecked his ship, but was himself maimed by the mast [<hi>sic</hi>]. He dwelt at Fair-dale. An old woman was drifted ashore from the ship into Carline-frith, where Head-river-sand now is.

<p n=18.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Olwe</hi>, the son of Ey-stan, took land in settlement east of Grims-river. Before him no man had dared to take land in settlement there since Heor-laf was slain, by reason of the wights <hi>or</hi> spirits of the country. Olwe dwelt at Head. His son was Thor-aren of Head, the brother <pb id=pb198a n=198>by the same mother of Hall-dor, Em-wolf&apos;s son, whom Mord Urocia slew under Cliff, and of Arnor, whom Flose and Colban, the sons of Thord Frey&apos;s gode, slew at Shaft-fell-moot.

<p n=18.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sig-mund Cleek</hi>, the son of Ean-wend Bill, the son of Hrod-gar Horn, the son of Brune,

<lg>
    <l>Who did a daring-do at Brafield,
</lg>

<p n=18.7.1>took land in settlement between Grim-river and Carline-river, which then ran west of Head.

<p n=18.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn</hi> was the name of a man, wealthy and a great man for show. He came to Iceland from Walldres, and took land in settlement between Carline-river and Buck-river, and dwelt at Rowan. He got on badly with Lod-mund the Old.


<p n=19.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>19.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lod-mund the Old</hi> took land in settlement between Buck-river and Foul-beck, as it is written before. What is now called Iockle-river in Sun-ham-sand, which parts the lands of the Quarter, was then called Foul-beck. Lod-mund had [S: six sons or more]. Wale was the name of a son of his, the father of Sig-mund, that had to wife Ord-laug, daughter of Ey-wend the Ey-wersh [Island-dweller].

<p n=19.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Another son of Lod-mund&apos;s was named Summer-lid, the father of Thor-stan Hollow-mouth of Mark, the father of Thora, the mother of Stan, the father of Thora, the mother of Swart the White, the step-son of Skafte; he was Summer-lid&apos;s son. Skafte <hi>or</hi> Shafto the Law-speaker <pb id=pb199a n=199>had to wife Thora after Summer-lid, as it is said in the <hi>Genealogy of the Aulfusings</hi>.

<p n=19.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>We-mund</hi> was the name of the third son of Lod-mund, the father of Thor-katla, whom Thor-stan Weefil had to wife. Their daughter was Arn-katla, the mother of Hrode and of Thor-dis, whom Stan, Brand&apos;s son, had to wife. Their daughter was Thora.

<p n=19.3.1>Are was the name of Lod-mund&apos;s fourth son, and Hrod-wald the fifth.

<p n=19.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Unfey, the sixth son of Lod-mund, was a bastard. He had to wife Thras-laug, the daughter of Ey-wind Ey-wersh [the Island-dweller], the sister of Ord-laug. From all of them are many men come.

<p n=19.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Now are written the settlements in the East-frith-folk Quarter, according as wise men and historians have told of them. There have been in this Quarter many great men since, and many great histories have taken place there.


</div3>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 lang=is id=lib5 n=V rend="align-with(en.lib5)">
<head>LIB. V.</head>

<p n=0.1><anchor id=a199.13>Her hefr Land-n&aoacute;m í Sunnlendinga-fiórðungs, es baztr es lannz-kostr <anchor id=a199.14>á &aolig;llo Íslande, ok ágætaster menn hafa bygt, bæðe lærðer <anchor id=a199.15>ok leiker.<note place=apparatus id=an199.7><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Her ... leiker]</ab> S runs:&mdash;Her hefjaz upp landnám í Sunnlendinga fiórðunge, er með mestom blóma er allz Íslannz fyr lannz-kosta sakar, ok hofðingja þeirra er þar hafa bygt, bæðe lærðer ok ólærðer.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a199.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Austfirðer</hi> bygðosk fyrst á Íslande. En á miðle <anchor id=a199.17>Horna-fiarðar ok Reykja-ness varð seinst albygt: þar <anchor id=a199.18>réð veðr ok brim land-t&aolig;ko manna fyr hafn-leyses sakar ok &oelig;ræves. <anchor id=a199.19>Sumer þeir es fyrster kómo út, bygðo næster fi&aolig;llom; ok merkðo <anchor id=a200.1><pb id=pb200 n=200><note place=margin>[276: v. 1.]</note>at því lannz-kostena, at kvik-féið fýstesk frá siónom til fiallanna. <anchor id=a200.2>Þeir menn es síðan kómo ut, þótto hiner numet hafa of víða land <anchor id=a200.3>es fyrre kómo. En á þat sætte Haraldr konungr þá enn Hárfagre, <anchor id=a200.4>at enge skylde víðara nema, an hann mætte elde yfer fara á dege <anchor id=a200.5>með skipverjom sínom.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a200.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Menn skylde eld g&oelig;ra þá es sól være í austre. Þá skylde <anchor id=a200.7>g&oelig;ra svá at ryke<note place=apparatus id=an200.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þá ... ryke]</ab> conject.; þar skylde gera aðra reyke, vell.</note>, svá at hvára sæe frá &aolig;ðrom. En þeir eldar, es <anchor id=a200.8>g&oelig;rver vóro þá es sól vas í austre, skylde brenna til nætr; síðan <anchor id=a200.9>skylde þeir ganga til þess es sól være í vestre, ok g&oelig;ra þar aðra <anchor id=a200.10>elda.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>


<p n=2.1><anchor id=a200.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórolfr</hi>, son Herjolfs Horna-briótz, ok Óláfr bróðer <anchor id=a200.12>hans vóro konungar at Uppl&aolig;ndom.

<p><anchor id=a200.13>Með þeim vas Fleinn skáld, Hiors-son, sa es f&oeacute;d<hi>d</hi>esk upp <anchor id=a200.14>norðr á M&oeacute;re, í eyjo þeirre skamt frá Borgund es Iosur-heið <anchor id=a200.15>heiter: þar bió faðer hans. Fleinn fór til Danmerkr á fund<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a200.16>Eysteins konungs, ok feck þar mikla virðing af skáldskap sínom, <anchor id=a200.17>svá at konungr gaf hónom dóttor sína.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a200.18><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þrase vas son Þórolfs. Hann fór af H&aolig;rða-lande til Íslannz, <anchor id=a200.19>ok nam land miðle I&aolig;kuls-ár ok Kalda-klofs-ár; ok bió á Bialla-brecku.&mdash;Þar <anchor id=a200.20>heita nú Þrasa-staðer, skamt austr frá forsenom; en<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a200.21>leiðe Þrasa es fyr vestan Fors-&aoacute;, heldr n&oelig;r &aoacute;nne, í Drangs-hlíð <anchor id=a201.1><pb id=pb201 n=201><note place=margin>[277: v. 2.]</note>under gnúpenom, ok es skriða á hlaupen. Geirmundr vas son <anchor id=a201.2>Þrasa, faðer Þórbiarnar, f&aolig;ðor Branz<note place=apparatus id=an201.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> f. Þorbiarnar, f. Brandz í Skógom, S, omitting all the following links.</note> <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Skeggja, f. Bolla í Skógom, <anchor id=a201.3>f. Skeggja, f. Hildar er átte Niall í Skógom, Sigmundar-son; þeirra <anchor id=a201.4>s. Skegge, f. Eyjolfs, f. Branz er nú býr í Skógom<note place=apparatus id=an201.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Skógom]</ab> [S. Hann (Þrase) bió Skógom enom eystrom; hann vas ramm-aukenn miok ok átte deilor við Loðmund enn Gamla, sem áðr es ritað: <foreign lang=en-UK>Thrase was very strength-eaken (lycanthropic), and had quarrels with Lodmund the Old, as is written before</foreign>].</note><hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a201.5><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrafn</hi> enn <hi rend=sc>Heimske</hi> hét g&aolig;fogr maðr,&mdash;son Valgarz,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a201.6>Vémundar sonar Orðlo-kars, Þórolfs sonar <anchor id=a201.7>Váganefs, Hr&oeacute;reks sonar Sl&oelig;ngvand-bauga, Harallz sonar Hilde-fannar <anchor id=a201.8>Dana konongs.&mdash;Hann fór or Þróndheime til Íslannz; ok <anchor id=a201.9>nam miðle Kalda-klofs-ár ok Lamba-fellz-ár. Hann bió at Raufar-felle<note place=apparatus id=an201.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Rauðafelle eno eystra, S.</note>. <anchor id=a201.10>Hans b&aolig;rn vóro þau Helge Blá-fauskr; ok Freygerðr; ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a201.11>Iorundr Goðe.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a201.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ásgeirr Cneif hét maðr, son Oleifs Hvíta, Skærings sonar, <anchor id=a201.13>Þórolfs sonar: móðer hans vas Þórhildr, dótter Þórsteins Hauga&shy;briótz. <anchor id=a201.14>Ásgeirr fór til Íslannz; ok nam land miðle Selja-landz-ár ok <anchor id=a201.15>Lamba-fellz-ár; ok bió þar es nú<note place=apparatus id=an201.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>nú]</ab> add. S.</note> heiter á Auðnom: hans son vas<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a201.16>Iorundr, ok Þórkell, faðer Ogmundar, f&aolig;ðor Ioans byscops <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>ens <anchor id=a201.17>Helga<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. Dótter Ásgeirs vas Helga <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>móðer Þorunnar, m. H&aolig;llo, m. <anchor id=a201.18>Þorláks byscops ens Helga<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>. Ásgeirr hafnaðe sialfráðe blótom.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a201.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórgeirr enn H&aolig;rdske, son Bárðar Blondo-horns, fór or <anchor id=a201.20>Viggjo or Þróndheime til Íslannz. Hann kauper land at Ásgeire<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a202.1><pb id=pb202 n=202><note place=margin>[279: v. 2.]</note>Cneif, miðle Lamba-fellz-ár, ok Ír-ár<note place=apparatus id=an202.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Írar-ár, S.</note>, ok bió í Holte. F&aoacute;m <anchor id=a202.2>vetrom síðarr feck hann Ásgerðar, dóttor Asks ens Úmálga; ok <anchor id=a202.3>vóro þeirra syner Þórgrímr enn Mikle, ok Holta-Þórer, faðer Þórleifs <anchor id=a202.4>Kráks ok Skorar-Geirs.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a202.5><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ófeigr hét maðr ágætr í Raums-dale<note place=apparatus id=an202.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Raumdæla fylke, S.</note>: hann varð missáttr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a202.6>við Haralld konung, ok biósk af því til Íslannz-ferðar<note place=apparatus id=an202.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> fór af þ. til Íslandz, H.</note>. Hann átte <anchor id=a202.7>Ásgerðe, dóttor Ascs ens Úmálga. En es hann vas buenn til <anchor id=a202.8>Íslannz, sende Haralldr konungr menn til hans; ok lét drepa hann. <anchor id=a202.9>En Ásgerðr fór út með b&aolig;rn þeirra, ok með henne bróðer hennar <anchor id=a202.10>laun-getenn, es Þórolfr hét. Ásgerðr nam land miðle Selja-lannz-múla<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a202.11>ok Markar-fliótz; ok Langa-nes allt upp til Ioldo-steins; ok <anchor id=a202.12>bió norðan í Cata-nese. B&aolig;rn Úfeigs ok Ásgerðar vóro þau, <anchor id=a202.13>Þórgeírr Gollner, ok Þórsteinn Flosco-skegg; Þórbi&aolig;rn enn Kvirre, <anchor id=a202.14>ok Álof Elliða-ski&aolig;ldr, es átte Þórbergr Corna-múle: þeirra b&aolig;rn, <anchor id=a202.15>Eysteinn, ok Hafþóra es Eiðr Skeggja son átte. Þórger(ðr) vas<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a202.16>(ok)<note place=apparatus id=an202.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok]</ab> add. S.</note> Ufeigs dótter, es átte Fiðr Ottkels son.

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a202.17><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórolfr, bróðer Ásgerðar, nam land at ráðe hennar, fyr vestan <anchor id=a202.18>Fliót, miðle Deilðar-á<note place=apparatus id=an202.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Deilda, S.</note> tveggja; ok bió í Þórolfs-felle. Með hónom <anchor id=a202.19>f&oeacute;ddesk upp Þórgeirr Gollner, son Ásgerðar, es þar bió síðan: <anchor id=a202.20>hann vas faðer Nials, es inne vas brendr með átta<note place=apparatus id=an202.6><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> viii m&acomb;, vell.</note> mann at Berg-þórs-hvále.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=3.6><anchor id=a202.21><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Ásbi&aolig;rn Reyrketils son ok Steinfiðr, bróðer hans, n&aoacute;mo land <anchor id=a203.1><pb id=pb203 n=203><note place=margin>[281: v. 3.]</note>fyr ofan Cross-&aoacute;, fyr austan<note place=apparatus id=an203.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> ok fyr austan, S.</note> Fliót. Steinfinnr bió á Steinfinnz-st&aolig;ðom; <anchor id=a203.2>ok es ecki manna frá hónom komet. Ásbi&aolig;rn helgaðe <anchor id=a203.3>land-nám sítt Þór, ok kallaðe Þórs-m&aolig;rk: hans son vas Ketill enn <anchor id=a203.4>Auðge, es átte Þórgerðe<note place=apparatus id=an203.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Þuride, S (wrong).</note> Gollnis dóttor; þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau <anchor id=a203.5>Helge ok Ásgerðr.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=3.7><anchor id=a203.6><note place=apparatus id=an203.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> S places this § 7, much abridged, after ch. 7. 3.</note><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Heriolfr, son Bárðar Baregs sonar, bróðer Hallgríms Svið&shy;balca, <anchor id=a203.7>bygðe fyrst Vestmanna-eyjar; ok bió í Herjolfs-dale fyr <anchor id=a203.8>innan Ægis-dyrr; þar sem nú es hraun brunnet; hans son vas <anchor id=a203.9>Ormr Aurge<note place=apparatus id=an203.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Aurge]</ab> av&rcomb;ge (r above the line), H; auðge, S.</note>, es bió á Orms-st&aolig;ðom  við hamar niðre, þar sem nú <anchor id=a203.10>es bláset allt; ok átte einn allar Eyjarnar&mdash;þær liggja fyr Eyja-sande;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a203.11>en áðr vas þar veiðe-st&aolig;ð, ok engra manna vettr-seta. <anchor id=a203.12>Ormr átte Þórgerðe, dóttor Oddz Kald-munnz; þeirra dótter <anchor id=a203.13>Halldóra, es átte Eilífr Valla-Branz son.

<p n=4.1><anchor id=a203.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ketill H&oelig;ngr</hi> hét ágætr maðr í Naumo-dale<note place=apparatus id=an203.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Nauindæla fylke, S.</note>, son <anchor id=a203.15>Þórkels Naum-d&oelig;la-iarls, ok Hrafnildar, dóttor Ketils<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a203.16>H&oelig;ngs or Hrafnisto, Hallbiarnar sonar Half-trollz. Ketill bió <anchor id=a203.17>þá í Naumo-dale es Haralldr konungr Hárfagre sende þá Hallvarð <anchor id=a203.18>Harðfara, ok Sigtrygg Snarfara til Þórolfs Kveld-Ulfs sonar frænda <anchor id=a203.19>Ketils. Þá dró Ketill lið saman, ok ætlaðe at veita Þórolfe; en <anchor id=a203.20>Haraldr konungr fór et &oelig;fra of Eldo-eið, ok feck ser skip í Naumo-dale,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a203.21>ok fór svá norðr í Álost á Sand-nes, ok tók þar af lífe Þórolf <anchor id=a204.1><pb id=pb204 n=204><note place=margin>[282: v. 3.]</note>Kveldulfs son; ok fór þá norðan et ytra; ok fann þá marga menn <anchor id=a204.2>es til liðs ætloðo við Þórolf; ok hnekðe konungr þeim þá. Lítlo <anchor id=a204.3>síðarr fór Ketill H&oelig;ngr norðr í Torgar, ok brende inne Hr&oeacute;rek<note place=apparatus id=an204.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hr&oeacute;rek]</ab> Herrek, Cd. (I. E), the last line being sliced off in the vell.</note> <anchor id=a204.4>ok Hárek Hilderíðar sono es Þórolf h&aolig;fðo r&oeacute;gðan dauða-róge. <anchor id=a204.5>Efter<note place=apparatus id=an204.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Efter]</ab> here ends the second vell. leaf (see IV. 15. 2).</note> þat fór Ketill til Íslannz með Ingunne kono sína, ok sono<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a204.6>þeirra. Hann kom skipe síno í Rangár-ós, ok vas enn fyrsta vetr <anchor id=a204.7>at Hrafn<hi>s</hi>-toftom.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a204.8><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ketill nam &aolig;ll l&aolig;nd miðle Þiórs-ár ok Markar-fliótz. Þar <anchor id=a204.9>n&aoacute;mo síðan marger g&aolig;fger menn í land-náme Ketils. Hann eignaðe<note place=apparatus id=an204.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> með ráðe Hængs, S.</note> <anchor id=a204.10>(ser) einkanlega land miðle Rang-ár ok Hróars-l&oeacute;kjar, allt fyr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a204.11>norðan Reyðar-v&aolig;tn; ok bió at Hofe. Þá es Ketill hafðe f&oeacute;rt <anchor id=a204.12>flest þing<note place=apparatus id=an204.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þing]</ab> fong, S.</note> sín til Hofs, varð Ingunn kona hans léttare, ok f&oeacute;dde <anchor id=a204.13>þar Hrafn, es síðan varð L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr<note place=apparatus id=an204.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hrafn ... -maðr]</ab> es fyrst sagðe log upp á Islande, S.</note>&mdash;því heiter þar nú at <anchor id=a204.14>Hrafns-toftom. H&oeacute;ngr hafðe ok under ser l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll fyr austan <anchor id=a204.15>Rang-&aoacute; ena eystre<note place=apparatus id=an204.6><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eystre]</ab> ok, add. S.</note>, Vaz-fell til l&oeacute;kjar þess es fellr fyr útan Breiða-bólstað,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a204.16>ok fyr ofan Þver-&aoacute;, allt nema Dufþax-hollt ok Mýrena: <anchor id=a204.17>þat gaf hann þeim manne es Dufþacr hét: hann vas ham-rammr <anchor id=a204.18>miok.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a204.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Helge hét annarr son H&oeacute;ngs: hann átte Valdíse, Iólgeirs <anchor id=a204.20>dóttor: þeirra dótter vas Helga, es átte Oddbi&aolig;rn Aska-smiðr&mdash;við<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a204.21>hann es kent Oddbiarnar-leiðe. B&aolig;rn þeirra Oddbiarnar ok <anchor id=a204.22>Helgo vóro (þau), Hróalldr, Kolbeinn, ok Kolfinna, ok Ásv&aolig;r.

<pb id=pb205 n=205><p n=4.4><note place=margin>[283: v. 3.]</note>

<anchor id=a205.1><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Stórolfr vas enn þriðe son H&aolig;ngs: hans b&aolig;rn vóro þau <anchor id=a205.2>Ormr enn Sterke, ok Oddkell<note place=apparatus id=an205.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Otkell, S.</note>, ok Hrafnhildr, es átte Gunnarr <anchor id=a205.3>Baugs son: þeirra son Hámundr, faðer Gunnars at Hlíðar-enda.

<p n=4.5><anchor id=a205.4><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Vestarr hét enn fiórðe son H&oeacute;ngs: hann átte Móeiðe; þeirra <anchor id=a205.5>dótter vas Ásný, es átte Ofeigr Gretter<note place=apparatus id=an205.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeirra d. vas Ásný ... Gretter]</ab> add. S.</note>. Þeirra b&aolig;rn Ásmundr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a205.6>Skegg-lauss ok Ásbi&aolig;rn, ok Ásdís<note place=apparatus id=an205.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ásdís]</ab> S; Aldis, Cd.</note>, móðer Valla-Brannz; ok Ásv&aolig;r, <anchor id=a205.7>móðer Helga ens Svarta; Æsa hét ein.

<p n=4.6><anchor id=a205.8><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Herjolfr hét enn fimte son H&oeacute;ngs, faðer Sumarliða, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a205.9>Vetrliða Skálldz; þeir bioggo í Sumarliða-b&oeacute;&mdash;þar heiter nú <anchor id=a205.10>under Breckom.&mdash;Vetrliða v&aoacute;go þeir Þangbrandr prestr ok Goð-leifr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a205.11>Ara son af Reykja-hólom um níð.

<p n=4.6.1><anchor id=a205.12>[M&ast;: Vétrliðe nídde Þangbrand; fyrer þat vá Þangbrandr hann at <anchor id=a205.13>torf-gr&aolig;fom; hann varðesk með torf-skera Goðleife Arasyne af <anchor id=a205.14>Reykja-nese; Þangbrandr lagðe hann með spióte. Um Goðleif <anchor id=a205.15>orte Lióðar-keptr drápo.]<note place=apparatus id=an205.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Vétrliðe nídde ... drápo]</ab> add. M&ast;.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=4.7><anchor id=a205.16><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Sæbi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an205.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> S; Sveinbiorn, Cd.</note> Goðe vas son Hrafns Hángs sonar, es átte Unne Sigmundar dóttor: þeirra son vas Arngrímr.<note place=apparatus id=an205.6><p><anchor id=a205.17><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> [<foreign lang=en-UK>Egils Saga thus records the sons of Hæng:&mdash;</foreign>Stórolfr hét son Hængs; hann átte Hválenn ok Stórolfs-voll: hans son var Ormr enn sterke.

<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<p>Herjolfr hét annarr son Hængs; hann átte land í Fliótz-hlíð til mótz við Baug, ok út til Hváls l&oeacute;kjar: hann bió under Breckom; hans sonr hét Sumarliðe, faðer Vetrliða skállz.

<p>Helge var enn þriðe son Hængs; hann bió á Velle, ok átte land til Rangár et efra ok ofan til mótz við br&oeacute;ðr sína.

<p>Vestarr hét enn fiórðe son Hængs; hann átte land fyr austan Rangá miðle ok <pb>Þver-ár, ok enn neðra hlut Stórolfs-vallar; hann átte Móeiðe dóttor Hildiss or Hildis-ey; þeirra dótter var Ásný es átte Ófeigr Gretter: Vestarr bió á Móeiðar-hvále.

<p>Helge Hængs son átte Mobil dóttor Hallgeirs í Hallgeirs-ey. Þeirra dótter Helga as átte Oddbiorn aska-smiðr, er Oddbiarnar-leið er við kend.

<p>Hrafn var enn fimte son Hængs; hann var fyrstr l&aolig;gsogo maðr á Íslande; hann bió á Hofe eftir foðor sínu. Þórlaug var dótter Hrafns, er átte Iorundr Goðe; þeirra son var Valgarðr at Hofe. Hrafn vas gofgastr sona Hængs.]</note>

<pb id=pb206 n=206>

<note place=margin>[283: v. 3.]</note>

<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<p n=5.1><anchor id=a206.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sigvatr</hi> enn <hi rend=sc>Rauðe</hi> hét g&aolig;fogr maðr á Háloga-lande; <anchor id=a206.2>hann átte Rannveigo, dóttor Eyvindar Lamba, <anchor id=a206.3>f&aolig;ðor-systor Eyvindar Skálda-spilless; hennar móðer vas Ingebi&aolig;rg, <anchor id=a206.4>Hávarz dótter, Griótgarz sonar Háleygja iarls.&mdash;Sigvatr fór til <anchor id=a206.5>Íslannz<note place=apparatus id=an206.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Íslannz]</ab> at fýsn sínne, add. S.</note>, ok nam land at ráðe H&oelig;ngs í hans land-náme, fyr vestan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a206.6>Markar-fliót, Einhyrnings-m&aolig;rk fyr ofan Deilðar-&aoacute;; ok bió í <anchor id=a206.7>Ból-stað.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a206.8><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hans son vas Sigmundr, faðer Marðar Gígjo, es mestr <anchor id=a206.9>h&aolig;fðinge vas á Rangár-v&aolig;llom um hans daga; ok þat vas hvert <anchor id=a206.10>kallað lokl&aolig;so-þing es hann kom eige til. Sigmundr féll við Sand-hóla-ferjo.&mdash;Þar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a206.11>es haugr hans fyr austan Þiórs-&aoacute;. Rannveig vas <anchor id=a206.12>dótter Sigmundar, es átte Hámundr Gunnars son; þeirra son <anchor id=a206.13>Gunnarr at Hlíðar-enda.

<p><anchor id=a206.14>Sun Sighvatz vas Barekr, faðer Þórðar, f&aolig;ðor Steina.

<p n=5.2.1><anchor id=a206.15>[S: (Sighvatr R ...) Lamba ok Sigríðar, es átt hafðe Þór-hrólfr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a206.16>Kveldulfs son. Rannveig vas syster Finnz ens Skiálga. <anchor id=a206.17>Sighvatr fór til Íslannz at fýsn sínni, ok nam ... Bólstað. Hans <anchor id=a206.18>son Sigmundr, f. Marðar Gigjo, ok Sigfús<hi>s</hi> í Hlíð, ok Lamb<hi>a</hi> á <anchor id=a206.19>Lamba-st&aolig;ðom, ok Rannveig<hi>ar</hi> er átte Hám. Gunn. s.; ok Þórgerð<hi>ar</hi><note place=apparatus id=an206.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sigfúss ... Lamb<hi>a</hi> ... Rannveig<hi>ar</hi> ... <anchor id=a206.20>Þórgerð<hi>ar</hi>]</ab> thus emendated; Sigfus ... Lambe ... Rannveig ... Þorgerðr, S.</note> <anchor id=a207.1><pb id=pb207 n=207><note place=margin>[284: v. 4.]</note>es átte Onundr Bíldr í Floa. Annarr son Sighvatz var <anchor id=a207.2>Barecr, ...]

<p n=6.1><anchor id=a207.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Iorundr Goðe</hi>, son Hrafns ens Heimska, bygðe fyr <anchor id=a207.4>vestan Fliót, þar sem nú heiter á Svertings-st&aolig;ðom. <anchor id=a207.5>Hann g&oelig;rðe þar hof mikit. Biór einn lá<note place=apparatus id=an207.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>reiste, S. lá]</ab> sá, Cd. fyr a. Fliót] add. S.</note> ónumenn fyr austan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a207.6>Fliót, miðle Cross-ár ok Ioldo-steins: um þat land fór Iorundr <anchor id=a207.7>elde, ok lagðe til hofsens.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a207.8><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Iorundr feck Þórríðar, dóttor Þórbiarnar ens Gaulverska; ok <anchor id=a207.9>vas brúðkaup þeirra í Skarfa-nese at Flosa, es oll l&aolig;nd átte miðle <anchor id=a207.10>Þiórs-ár ok Eng-ár. Þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau, Ulfr Orgoðe<note place=apparatus id=an207.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ulfr ...]</ab> Ulfr Orgoðe, es Oddaverjar ero frá komner ok Sturlungar. Mart stór-menne es frá Iorunde komet á Islande, S.</note>; ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a207.11>Þórunn, es átte Vígfúss í Hlíð; ok Valgarðr at Hofe: hans móðer <anchor id=a207.12>vas Þórlaug, dótter Hrafns H&oelig;ngs sonar: hann átte Unne, dóttor <anchor id=a207.13>Marðar Gígjo síðarr an Hrútr á Kams-nese.

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a207.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórkell Bundin-fóte nam land at ráðe H&oelig;ngs um-hverfis Þrí-hyrning; <anchor id=a207.15>ok bió þar under fialleno. Hann vas han-rammr miok:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a207.16>hans b&aolig;rn vóro þau B&aolig;rkr Blátannar-skegg, faðer Starkaðar under <anchor id=a207.17>Þríhyrninge; ok Þórunn, es átte Ormr enn Sterke; ok Dagrún, <anchor id=a207.18>móðer Bersa.

<p n=7.1><anchor id=a207.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Baugr</hi> hét maðr, fóst-bróðer H&oelig;ngs: (hann) fór til <anchor id=a207.20>Íslannz, ok vas enn fyrsta vet<hi>t</hi>r á Baugs-st&aolig;ðom; en<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a207.21>annan með H&oelig;nge.&mdash;Baugr vas son Rauðs, Ceallacs sonar, Cearvals <anchor id=a208.1><pb id=pb208 n=208><note place=margin>[286: v. 4.]</note>sonar Íra konungs.&mdash;Hann nam Fliótz-hlíð alla at ráðe Ketils <anchor id=a208.2>(H&oeacute;ngs) ofan um Breiða-bólstað til mótz<note place=apparatus id=an208.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mótz]</ab> móðz, Cd.</note> við H&oelig;ng; ok bió at <anchor id=a208.3>Hlíðar-enda. Hans syner vóro þeir Gunnarr ok Eyvindr, ok <anchor id=a208.4>Steinn enn Snialle; ok Hilldr, es átte Orn í Véli-gerðe<note place=apparatus id=an208.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Véli-]</ab> Vælu-, S.</note>.

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a208.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þeir Steinn enn Snialle; ok Sigmundr son Sigvatz Rauða,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a208.6>fóro útan af Eyrom, ok kómo til Sandhóla-ferjo aller senn, Sigmundr <anchor id=a208.7>ok f&aolig;ro-nautar hans, ok Steinn; ok vildo hvárer fyrr fara <anchor id=a208.8>yfer &aoacute;na. Þeir Sigmundr stok<hi>r</hi>oðo<note place=apparatus id=an208.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> skoroðo, Cd.; stokoðo, S.</note> húsk&aolig;rlom Steins, ok r&aoacute;ko <anchor id=a208.9>þá frá skipeno: þá kom Steinn at, ok hió Sigmund bana-h&oelig;gg.

<p n=7.2.1><anchor id=a208.10>Um víg þesse urðo Baugs-syner seker aller or Hlíðenne; fór<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a208.11>Gunnarr í Gunnars-holt; en Eyvindr under Fi&aolig;ll austr í Eyvindar-hóla; <anchor id=a208.12>en Sniall-Steinn<note place=apparatus id=an208.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sniall-Steinn]</ab> S; Steinn, Cd. Sniallsteins-hofða, S.</note> út í Sniallz-h&aolig;fða. Þat líkaðe ílla Þórgerðe <anchor id=a208.13>dóttor Sigmundar, at f&aolig;ðor-bane hennar fór út þangat; ok eggjaðe <anchor id=a208.14>Onund Bíld, bónda sínn, at hefna Sigmundar. Onundr fór með <anchor id=a208.15>þriá tege<note place=apparatus id=an208.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> xxx, Cd.</note> manna í Sniallz-h&aolig;fða ok bar þar eld at húsom. Sniall-Steinn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a208.16>geck út ok gafsk upp; þeir leiddo hann í h&aolig;fðann, ok v&aoacute;go <anchor id=a208.17>hann þar. Efter víg þat mælte Gunnarr bróðer hans:&mdash;hann átte <anchor id=a208.18>Hrafn-hilde Stórolfs dóttor, systor Orms ens Sterka; Hámundr vas <anchor id=a208.19>son þeirra. Þeir vóro báðer afreks-menn um afl ok vænleik.<note place=apparatus id=an208.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þeir vóro ... vænleik]</ab> add. S.</note>&mdash;Onundr <anchor id=a208.20>varð sekr um víg Sniall-Steins: hann sat með fiolmenne<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a209.1><pb id=pb209 n=209><note place=margin>[287: v. 4.]</note>tvá vettr. Orn í Veli-gerðe, mágr Gunnars, hélt niósnom til Onundar. <anchor id=a209.2>Efter Iól enn þriðja vettr fór Gunnarr með þriá tege<note place=apparatus id=an209.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> xxx, Cd.</note> manna <anchor id=a209.3>at Onunde, at til-vísan Arnar, (es) Onundr fór<note place=apparatus id=an209.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Onundr fór]</ab> add. S.</note> frá leik með tolfta <anchor id=a209.4>mann til hrossa sínna. Þeir fundosk í Orrosto-dale; þar fell <anchor id=a209.5>Onundr með fiórða mann; en einn af Gunnare. Gunnarr vas í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a209.6>blárre k&aoacute;po. Hann reið upp efter Holtom til Þiórs-ár; ok skamt <anchor id=a209.7>frá &aoacute;nne fell hann af bake, ok vas &oelig;rendr af s&aoacute;rom.

<p><anchor id=a209.8>En þá es syner Onundar vóxo upp, Sigmundr Cleyker ok Eilífr <anchor id=a209.9>Auðge, þá sótto þeir M&aolig;rð Gígjo frænda sínn at efter-mále. M&aolig;rðr <anchor id=a209.10>sagðe þat ó-h&aoacute;gt um sekjan mann. Þeir kv&aoacute;ðo ser við Orn verst<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a209.11>líka es þeim sat nest. M&aolig;rðr lagðe þat til, at þeir skyldo fá Erne <anchor id=a209.12>skóggangs-s&aolig;k, ok koma hónom svá or heraðe. Onundar-syner <anchor id=a209.13>tóko beitinga-mál<note place=apparatus id=an209.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bett-, Cd. ok varð hann svá sekr]</ab> S; ok varð sú sætt, Cd.</note> á hendr Erne; ok varð hann svá sekr, at Orn skylde <anchor id=a209.14>falla óheilagr fyrer Onundar-sonom, hver-vitna nema í Veli-gerðe, <anchor id=a209.15>ok í &aolig;rskotz-helge við land-eign sína. Onundar syner s&aoacute;to iamnan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a209.16>um hann; en hann gætte sín vel.

<p n=7.2.2><anchor id=a209.17>Þat vas einn tíma, at Orn rak naut or lande síno<note place=apparatus id=an209.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Svá fengo þeir fære á Erne at &hstrok; rak, S.</note>, þá kómo þeir at <anchor id=a209.18>hónom ok v&aoacute;go hann; ok hugðo menn at hann m&oelig;nde úheilagr fallet <anchor id=a209.19>hafa. Þórleifr Gneiste, bróðer Arnar, keypte at Þórmóðe Þióstars-syne, <anchor id=a209.20>at hann helgaðe Orn&mdash;Þórmóðr vas þá komenn út á Eyrom&mdash;,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a210.1><pb id=pb210 n=210><note place=margin>[288: v. 5.]</note>hann skaut þá skot svá langt af hand-boga, at fall Arnar varð í <anchor id=a210.2>&aolig;rskotz-helge hans. Þá mælto þeir Hámundr Gunnars son ok <anchor id=a210.3>Þórleifr efter Orn; en M&aolig;rðr veitte þann br&oeacute;ðrom. Þeir guldo <anchor id=a210.4>eige fé; en skyldo vesa héraðs-seker or Floa. Þá bað M&aolig;rðr til <anchor id=a210.5>handa Eilífe Þórkotlo Ketilbiarnar dóttor, ok fylgðe henne heiman<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a210.6>H&aolig;<hi>f</hi>ða-land<note place=apparatus id=an210.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> fylgðo h. h. Höfða lond, S.</note>; ok bió Eilífr þar; en til handa Sigmunde bað hann<note place=apparatus id=an210.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>til h. Sigmunde bað hann]</ab> S; en Sigm. fekk, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a210.7>Arngunnar dóttor Þórsteins Dranga-karls, ok rézt hann austr í <anchor id=a210.8>sveit<note place=apparatus id=an210.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok rézt ... sveit]</ab> add. S.</note>. Þá gifte M&aolig;rðr (ok) Rannveigo systor sína Hámunde <anchor id=a210.9>Gunnars syne; ok fór hann þá at<note place=apparatus id=an210.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> á, Cd.</note> bua a<hi>t</hi> Hlíðar-enda: ok vóro <anchor id=a210.10>þeirra syner, Gunnarr at Hlíðar-enda, ok Hí&aolig;rtr ok Helge, ok Hafr,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a210.11>ok Ormr Skógar-nef, es fell á Ormenom Langa með Óláfe konunge.

<p n=7.3><anchor id=a210.12><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hillder ok Hallgeirr, ok Liót syster þeirra, vóro Írsk<note place=apparatus id=an210.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Írsk]</ab> kynjoð af Vestr-londom, S.</note>. Þau <anchor id=a210.13>fóro til Íslannz; ok n&aoacute;mo land miðle Fliótz ok Rang-ár, Eyja-sveit <anchor id=a210.14>alla upp til Þver-ár. Hilder bió í Hildes-ey: hann vas faðer <anchor id=a210.15>Móeiðar at Móeiðar-hvále. Hallgeirr bió í Hallgeirs-ey: hans<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a210.16>dótter vas Mabil, es átte Helge H&oeacute;ngs son. En Liót bió á <anchor id=a210.17>Liótar-st&aolig;ðom.<note place=apparatus id=an210.6><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Here come in 3 continuous vellum leaves.</note>

<p n=7.4><anchor id=a210.18><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Dufþacr í Dufþacs-holte vas leysinge þeirra br&oeacute;ðra: hann <anchor id=a210.19>vas ham-ramr míok; ok svá vas Stórolfr H&oeacute;ngs son&mdash;hann bió þá <anchor id=a210.20>at Hvále&mdash;Þá skilðe á um beitingar. Þat sá ofreskr maðr um nótt,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a211.1><pb id=pb211 n=211><note place=margin>[290: v. 5.]</note>at bi&aolig;rn mikill geck frá Hvále<note place=apparatus id=an211.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1</ab> kveld, S.</note>, en griðongr frá Dufþacs-holte, ok <anchor id=a211.2>fundosk á Stórolfs-velle, ok gengosk at reiðer; ok mátte bi&aolig;rnenn <anchor id=a211.3>meira. Um morgonenn vas þar dalr efter es þeir h&aolig;fðo fundezk, <anchor id=a211.4>sem um være snuet i&aolig;rðinne, ok heiter þat<note place=apparatus id=an211.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4</ab> <ab type=textRef>þat]</ab> þar, S.</note> nú Oldo-gróf. Báðer <anchor id=a211.5>vóro þeir meidder, ok l&aoacute;go í reckjo.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a211.6><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Eilífr ok Bi&aolig;rn br&oeacute;ðr fóro or Sogne til Íslannz: Eilífr nam <anchor id=a211.7>Odda enn lítla upp til Reyðar-vaz, ok til Víkings-l&oeacute;kjar: hann <anchor id=a211.8>átte Helgo, dóttor Onundar Bíl<hi>l</hi>z. Þeirra son vas Eilífr enn Unge, <anchor id=a211.9>es átte Oddnýjo, dóttor Oddz ens Mióva: þeirra dótter vas Þóríðr, <anchor id=a211.10>es átte Þórgeirr í Odda: þeirra dótter vas Helga.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=7.6><anchor id=a211.11><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Bí&aolig;rn bió í Svín-haga, ok nam land upp með Rang-&aoacute;; hans <anchor id=a211.12>b&aolig;rn vóro þau Þórsteinn, faðer Gríms Holta-skalla; ok Hallveig, <anchor id=a211.13>móðer Þórunnar, móðor Goðrúnar, móðor Sæmundar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Brandz <anchor id=a211.14>byscops<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=7.7><anchor id=a211.15><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Colr<note place=apparatus id=an211.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15</ab> Kolle, S.</note> hét maðr, son Óttars Ballar; hann nam land fyr austan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a211.16>Reyðar-vatn ok Stota-l&oeacute;k, fyr vestan Rang-&aoacute;<note place=apparatus id=an211.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16</ab> <ab type=textRef>fyr vestan Rang-&aoacute;]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok Trolla-skóg<note place=apparatus id=an211.5><ab type=textRef>ok Tr.]</ab> S; of Trolla-skog, vell.</note>, til <anchor id=a211.17>móðz við Þórstein Tiald-st&oelig;ðing; ok bió at<note place=apparatus id=an211.6><ab type=lineNumRef>17</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> S; í, vell.</note> Sand-gile. Hans son <anchor id=a211.18>vas Egill, es sat fyre Gunnare Hámundar syne hiá Cnafa-hólom; <anchor id=a211.19>ok fell þar sialfr, ok Austmenn tveir, ok Are hús-karl hans; en <anchor id=a211.20>Hi&aolig;rtr, bróðer Gunnars, or hans liðe.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=7.8><anchor id=a211.21><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Syner Gunnars vóro þeir Grane ok Hamundr. Gunnarr <anchor id=a211.22>barðesk við Otkel or Kirkjo-b&oeacute; við garð at Hofe; ok fell Otkell <anchor id=a212.1><pb id=pb212 n=212><note place=margin>[291: v. 5.]</note>þar ók Skamcell. Geirr Goðe, ok Gizorr Hvíte, ok Ásgrímr <anchor id=a212.2>Elliða-Gríms son, ok St&aolig;rkoðr undan Þríhyrnige&mdash;son Bárðar Blá&shy;skeggs, <anchor id=a212.3>Þórkels sonar Bundin-fóta, es átte Þóríðe Egils dóttor frá <anchor id=a212.4>Sand-gile&mdash;þeir fóro um leiðar-skeið; ok kómo um nótt með þriá <anchor id=a212.5>tige<note place=apparatus id=an212.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> xxx, vell.</note> manna til Hlíðar-enda; en Gunnarr vas fyrer með einn karl-mann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a212.6>full-tíða. Tveir menn féllo or liðe Geirs; en sextán urðo <anchor id=a212.7>sárer áðr Gunnarr féll.

<p n=7.9><anchor id=a212.8><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Hrólfr hét maðr Rauð-skeggr; hann nam Holms-l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll, <anchor id=a212.9>miðle Fisk-ár ok Rang-ár; ok bió at Forse. Hans b&aolig;rn vóro <anchor id=a212.10>þau, Þórsteinn Rauðnefr, es þar bió síðan; ok Þóra, móðer Þórkels<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a212.11>Mána; ok Ása, móðer Þórnýjar<note place=apparatus id=an212.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórnýjar]</ab> Þórunnar, S.</note>, móðor Þórgeirs at Liósa-vatne; <anchor id=a212.12>ok Helga, móðer Oddz frá Mió-synde: dótter Oddz vas <anchor id=a212.13>Ásbi&aolig;rg<note place=apparatus id=an212.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Asborg, S.</note>, es átte Þórsteinn Goðe, faðer Biarna ens Spaka, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a212.14>Skeggja, f&aolig;ðor Márcuss L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz<note place=apparatus id=an212.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> S; log-mannz, vell.</note>.

<p n=7.10><anchor id=a212.15><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Þórsteinn Rauðnefr vas blót-maðr mikill, ok blótaðe forsenn;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a212.16>ok skylde bera leifar allar á forsenn. Hann vas ok fram-sýnn miok. <anchor id=a212.17>Þórsteinn lét reka<note place=apparatus id=an212.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>reka]</ab> telja, S.</note> sauð sínn or rétt tottogo hundroð; en þá hlióp <anchor id=a212.18>alle réttena þaðan af. En því vas sauðrenn svá margr, at hann sá <anchor id=a212.19>um haustom hverer feiger vóro; ok lét þá alla skera. En et síðasta <anchor id=a212.20>haust es hann lifðe, þá mælte hann í sauða-rétt: &lsquo;Skereð ér nú<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a212.21>sauðe þá es ér vileð; feigr em ek nú, eða allr sauðrenn ella, nema <anchor id=a213.1><pb id=pb213 n=213><note place=margin>[292: v. 6.]</note>bæðe sé.&rsquo; En þá nótt es Þórsteinn dó, rak sauðenn allan út í <anchor id=a213.2>forsenn, ok fórsk þar. Helge hét dótter hans<note place=apparatus id=an213.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hans]</ab> Hrolfs, S.</note>, es átte Helge Rogn <anchor id=a213.3>Ketils son.

<p n=8.1><anchor id=a213.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ulfr Gylðer</hi> hét herser ríkr í Norege á Þela-m&aolig;rk: <anchor id=a213.5>hann bió á Fifla-v&aolig;llom í Tinz-dale: hans<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a213.6>son vas Ásgrímr, faðer þeirra Þórsteins, ok Þórlaugar. Þórkatla <anchor id=a213.7>hét móðer þeirra, es Hringja vas k&aolig;lloð.

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a213.8><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Haraldr konungr enn Hárfagre sende Þórorm<note place=apparatus id=an213.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Ringja, vell.</note> frænda sínn or <anchor id=a213.9>Þrumo af Ogðom, at heimta skatt af Ásgríme, sem konungr bauð <anchor id=a213.10>hónom: en hann galt eige; þvi at hann hafðe sent konunge lítlo<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a213.11>áðr hest Gauzkan, ok silfr mikit; ok sagðe þat gi&aolig;f skyldo en <anchor id=a213.12>eige giald; þvi at hann hafðe aldre áðr skatt goldet. Aftr sende <anchor id=a213.13>konungr féit; ok vilde eige hafa.

<p n=8.2.1><anchor id=a213.14>Þórkatla, kona Ásgríms, f&oeacute;dde svein-barn. Ásgrímr bað út <anchor id=a213.15>bera. Þræll hvatte gref, sá es honom<note place=apparatus id=an213.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>honom]</ab>?</note> skylde gr&aolig;f grafa; en<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a213.16>sveinnenn vas lagðr niðr á golf. Þá heyrðesk þeim &aolig;llom, sem <anchor id=a213.17>sveinnenn kvæðe þetta:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a213.18><note place=apparatus id=an213.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Láte ... m&aolig;nnom]</ab> omitted by oversight in Corpus Poet. Bor., where it should have stood in Bk. vi.</note>Láte m&aolig;g til móðor! mer es kalt á golfe;
    <l><anchor id=a213.19>Hvar mone sveinn en s&oeacute;mre, an at síns f&aolig;ðor &aolig;rnom.
    <l><anchor id=a213.20>Þarf eige iarn at eggja, né iarðar-men skerða;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a213.21>Létteð lióto verke! lifa mun-ek enn með m&aolig;nnom.
</lg>

<p n=8.2.2><anchor id=a213.22>Síðan vas sveinnenn vatne ausenn, ok kallaðr Þórsteinn.

<pb id=pb214 n=214><p n=8.2.3><note place=margin>[294: v. 6.]</note>

<anchor id=a214.1>En es Þórormr kom annat sinn at heimta skatt, kvadde Ásgrímr <anchor id=a214.2>þings; ok spurðe b&oeacute;ndr ef þeir vilde greiða konunge slíkan skatt <anchor id=a214.3>sem beitz vas. Þeir b&aoacute;ðo hann svara fyre sik; en vildo þó eige <anchor id=a214.4>greiða. Þinget vas við skóg; ok es þá varðe minzt, hlióp fram <anchor id=a214.5>þræll Þórorms at Ásgríme ok drap hann. B&oeacute;ndr dr&aoacute;po hann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a214.6>þegar. Þórsteinn vas þá í hernaðe. Ok es hann spurðe víg f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a214.7>síns, selðe hann iarðer sínar til silfrs; ok biósk til Íslannz or Grenmar<hi>e</hi><note place=apparatus id=an214.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Gr&oelig;nmar, vell.</note> <anchor id=a214.8>fyr austan Líðandis-nes. Ok áðr hann f&oeacute;re, brende Þórsteinn <anchor id=a214.9>Þórorm í Þrumo inne, ok hefnde f&aolig;ðor síns.

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a214.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórgeirr hét bróðer hans; hann vas þá tio vetra, es Þórormr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a214.11>lét drepa f&aolig;ðor þeirra. Hann fór til Íslannz með Þórsteine; ok <anchor id=a214.12>Þórunn móðor-syster þeirra, ok nam Þórunnar-halsa; ok bygðe <anchor id=a214.13>þar síðan.

<p n=8.4><anchor id=a214.14><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórsteinn kom í Rang-ár-ós, ok nam land at ráðe Flosa fyr <anchor id=a214.15>ofan Víkings-l&oeacute;k, ok út til mótz við Svínhaga-Bi&aolig;rn, ok bió í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a214.16>Skarðe eno eystra.

<p n=8.5><anchor id=a214.17><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Um hans daga kom skip þat í Rangár-ós, es sótt mikil vas <anchor id=a214.18>á; ok vilde einge (taka) við þeim. En Þórsteinn fór efter þeim, <anchor id=a214.19>ok g&oelig;rðe þeim tiald-búð þar sem nú heiter Tialda-staðer<note place=apparatus id=an214.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> Tialdar-, vell.</note>; ok <anchor id=a214.20>þiónaðe þeim þar sialfr meðan þeir lifðo. En þeir dó aller.&mdash;Hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a214.21>vas síðan kallaðr Þórsteinn Tiald-st&oeacute;ðingr&mdash;en sá þeirra es langs<hi>t</hi> <anchor id=a214.22>lifðe efter, fal goll síft ok silfr ok gróf niðr, svá at þat hefer enge <anchor id=a214.23>fundet síðan.

<pb id=pb215 n=215><p n=8.6><note place=margin>[295: v. 7.]</note>

<anchor id=a215.1><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórsteinn átte fyrr Þóríðe Gunnars dóttor, Hámundar sonar. <anchor id=a215.2>Þeirra b&aolig;rn, Gunnarr, Þórhallr, Iósteinn, Iorunn<note place=apparatus id=an215.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Iorunn]</ab> Ior, vell.</note>. Síðan átte Þórsteinn <anchor id=a215.3>Þóríðe, dóttor Sigfúss<note place=apparatus id=an215.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sigfúss]</ab> Figfús, vell.</note> or Hlíð: þeirra b&aolig;rn, Skegge, ok <anchor id=a215.4>Þórkatla, Rannveig, ok Arn<hi>þ</hi>óra.

<p n=8.7><anchor id=a215.5><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> En Þórgeirr, bróðer Þórsteins, keypte Odda-land at Hrafne<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a215.6>H&oeacute;ngs syne, strander báðar, ok Varma-dal, ok Oddann allan <anchor id=a215.7>miðle Hróars-l&oeacute;kjar ok Rang-ár. Hann bió fyrstr í Odda, ok átte <anchor id=a215.8>Þóríði, dóttor Eilífs ens Unga: þeirra dótter Helga, es átte Svartr <anchor id=a215.9>Ulfs son: þeirra son Loðmundr í Odda, faðer Sigfúss prestz, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a215.10>Sæmundar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>ens Fróða<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=9.1><anchor id=a215.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Flose</hi> hét maðr, son Þórbiarnar ens Gaulverska. Hann <anchor id=a215.12>drap þriá sýslo-menn Harallz konungs ens Hárfagra; <anchor id=a215.13>ok fór efter þat til Íslannz; ok nam land fyr austan Rang-&aoacute;, alla <anchor id=a215.14>Rangár-v&aolig;llo ena eystre: hans dótter vas Ásný, móðer Þóríðar, <anchor id=a215.15>es Valla-Brandr átte: son Valla-Brannz vas Flose, faðer Kolbeins,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a215.16>f&aolig;ðor Goðrúnar, es Sæmundr <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>enn Fróðe<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi> átte. Flose átte Goð&shy;rúno, <anchor id=a215.17>Þóris dóttor, Skegg-Brodda sonar.

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a215.18><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Af því fór Loptr enn Gamle, systor-son Flosa, at blóta á <anchor id=a215.19>Gaulom, at Flosa vas ófritt í Norege. Flose enn Norr&oeacute;ne átte <anchor id=a215.20>Þórdíse ena Miklo, dóttor Þórunnar ennar Auðgo, Ketils dóttor ens<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a215.21>Einhenda: þeirra dótter vas Ásný, es átte Þórgeirr.

<p n=9.3><anchor id=a215.22><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ketill enn Einhende hét maðr, son Auðunnar Þunn-cars; <anchor id=a216.1><pb id=pb216 n=216><note place=margin>[296: v. 7.]</note>hann nam Rangár-v&aolig;llo alla<note place=apparatus id=an216.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>alla]</ab> add. S.</note> ena ýtre, fyr ofan L&oeacute;kjar-botna, en <anchor id=a216.2>fyr austan Þiórs-&aoacute;; ok bió at Á. Hann átte Ásleifo, Þórgils <anchor id=a216.3>dóttor: þeirra son vas Auðunn, faðer Brynjolfs, f&aolig;ðor Bergþórs, <anchor id=a216.4>f&aolig;ðor Þórláks <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Þorhallz, f. Þorláks<note place=apparatus id=an216.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Þórláks]</ab> S; Þorlaks s., H.</note> byscops ens Helga<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=9.4><anchor id=a216.5><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ketill Áurriðe, br&oelig;ðrungr Ketils ens Einhenda, nam land et<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a216.6>ýtra með Þiórs-&aoacute;; ok bió á V&aolig;llom enom iðrom<note place=apparatus id=an216.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>iðrom]</ab> yðrom, vell.</note>: hans son vas <anchor id=a216.7>Helge <hi>H</hi>rogn, es Helgo átte, dóttor Þórsteins Rauðnefs<note place=apparatus id=an216.4><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> dóttor Hrolfs Rauðskeggs, S.</note>: þeirra <anchor id=a216.8>son vas Oddr Mióve, faðer Ásgerðar, es átte Þórsteinn Goðe; ok <anchor id=a216.9>Oddnýjar<note place=apparatus id=an216.5><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Oddnýjar]</ab> Asborgar, S.</note>, es Eilífr enn Unge átte.

<p n=9.5><anchor id=a216.10><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Ormr Auðge, son Ulfs ens Hvassa, nam land með Rang-&aoacute; at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a216.11>ráðe Ketils ens Einhenda. Hann bió í Húsa-garðe, ok Áskell, son <anchor id=a216.12>hans, efter hann; en Brandr son hans<note place=apparatus id=an216.6><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Brandr son hans]</ab> emend, according to M&ast;; Brandr son Áskels, M&ast;.</note> reiste fyrst b&oeacute; á V&aolig;llom.&mdash;Frá <anchor id=a216.13>hónom ero Vallverjar komner.

<p n=9.6><anchor id=a216.14><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórsteinn Lunan<note place=apparatus id=an216.7><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> S; launan, vell. (here).</note> hét maðr nor&oeacute;nn ok far-maðr mikill. Hónom <anchor id=a216.15>vas þat spáð, at hann m&oelig;nde á því lande deyja, es þá vas enn ecki<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a216.16>bygt. Þórsteinn fór til Íslannz í elle sinne með Þórgisle syne <anchor id=a216.17>sínom. Þeir n&aoacute;mo enn &oelig;fra hlut Þiórsár-holta; ok bioggo í <anchor id=a216.18>Lunans-holte<note place=apparatus id=an216.8><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Lunans-]</ab> H and S (here).</note>; ok þar es Þórsteinn heygðr. Dótter Þórgils vas <anchor id=a216.19>Ásleif, es átte Ketill enn Einhende: syner þeirra vóro þeir Auðunn, <anchor id=a216.20>es áðr vas nefndr; ok Eilífr, faðer Þórgeirs, f&aolig;ðor Skeggja, f&aolig;ðor<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a217.1><pb id=pb217 n=217><note place=margin>[298: v. 8.]</note>Hialta í Þiórsár-dale. Hann vas faðer Iórunnar, móðor Goðrúnar, <anchor id=a217.2>móðor Einars, f&aolig;ðor Magnús byscops.

<p n=9.7><anchor id=a217.3><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Gunnsteinn Berserkja-bane, son Bolverks Blindinga-trióno, <anchor id=a217.4>drap tvá berserke; ok hafðe annarr þeirra áðr drepet Griótgarð <anchor id=a217.5>Háleygja-iarl í Solva fyr innan Agða-nes. Gunnsteinn vas síðan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a217.6>skotenn &aolig;ro Finnskre or skóge á skipe síno norðr í Hefne. Son <anchor id=a217.7>Gunnsteins vas Þórgeirr, es átte Þórunne ena Auðgo, móðor Ketils <anchor id=a217.8>Einhenda: þeirra dótter vas Þórdís en Mikla.

<p n=9.8><anchor id=a217.9><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Raðormr ok Iólgeirr br&oeacute;ðr kómo vestan um haf til Íslannz. <anchor id=a217.10>Þeir n&aoacute;mo land miðle Þiórs-ár ok Rang-ár. Raðormr eignaðesk<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a217.11>land fyr austan Rauða-l&oeacute;k; ok bió í Vetleifs-holte<note place=apparatus id=an217.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Væt-, S.</note>: hans dótter <anchor id=a217.12>vas Arnbi&aolig;rg, es átte Svertingr Hiorleifs son: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro <anchor id=a217.13>þau, Grímr L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr, ok Iórunn. Síðarr átte Arnbi&aolig;rgo <anchor id=a217.14>Gnúpr Molda-Gnúps son: ok vóro þeirra b&aolig;rn, Hallsteinn á <anchor id=a217.15>Hialla; ok Rannveig, móðer Skafta l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz<note place=apparatus id=an217.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> logmannz; H and S.</note>; ok Geirný,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a217.16>móðer Skalld-Hrafns.

<p n=9.9><anchor id=a217.17><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Iólgeirr eignaðesk land fyr útan Rauða-l&oeacute;k, ok til Steins-l&oeacute;kjar. <anchor id=a217.18>Hann bió á Iólgeirs-st&aolig;ðom.

<p n=9.10><anchor id=a217.19><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Ásgeirr Hnockan, son Dufþacs, Dufnials sonar, Cearvals <anchor id=a217.20>sonar Íra konungs: hann nam land míðle Steins-l&oeacute;kjar ok Þiórs-ár;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a217.21>ok bió í Áskels-h&aolig;fða. Hans son vas Ásmundr, faðer Ásgauz, <anchor id=a218.1><pb id=pb218 n=218><note place=margin>[299: v. 8.]</note>f&aolig;ðor Skeggja, f&aolig;ðor Þórvallz, f&aolig;ðor Þórlaugar, móðor Þórgerðar, <anchor id=a218.2>móðor Ioans byscops <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>ens Helga<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=9.11><anchor id=a218.3><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Þórkell Þialfe, fóst-bróðer Raðorms, eignaðesk l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll á <anchor id=a218.4>miðle Rang-ár ok Þiórs-ár; ok bió í Háfe. Hann átte Þórunne <anchor id=a218.5>Eyversko: þeirra dótter Þórdís, móðer Skeggja, f&aolig;ðor Þórvallz<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a218.6>í Áse.

<p n=9.12><anchor id=a218.7><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Þaðan hafðe Hialte, mágr hans, reiðskióta til Alþingis, ok <anchor id=a218.8>þeir tolf, þá es hann vas út komenn með Cristne. En einge <anchor id=a218.9>treystesk annarra, fyrer ofríke Rúnolfs Ulfs sonar, es sekðan hafðe <anchor id=a218.10>Hialta um goð-g&aoacute;.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p><anchor id=a218.11>Nú ero ritaðer þeir menn, es l&aolig;nd hafa þeget ok numet í land-náme <anchor id=a218.12>Ketils H&oeacute;ngs.

<p n=10.1><anchor id=a218.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Loptr</hi>, son Orms Fróða sonar, fór af Gaulom til <anchor id=a218.14>Íslannz ungr at aldre; ok nam land fyr útan Þiórs-&aoacute;, <anchor id=a218.15>miðle Rauð-ár ok Þiórs-ár<note place=apparatus id=an218.1><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>miðle R. ok Þ.]</ab> add. S.</note>, ok upp til Skúfs-l&oeacute;kjar; ok Breiða-mýre<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a218.16>ena eystre upp til Súlo-hollz; ok bió í Gaulverja-b&oeacute;; ok Oddný, <anchor id=a218.17>móðer hans, dótter Þórbiarnar ens Gaulverska.

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a218.18><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Loptr fór útan et þriðja hvert sumer fyrer h&aolig;nd þeirra Flosa <anchor id=a218.19>beggja, móðor-bróðor síns, at blóta at hofe því es Þórbi&aolig;rn, móðor-faðer<note place=apparatus id=an218.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>móðor-faðer]</ab> m. bróðer, vell., but &lsquo;.f.&rsquo; above the line.</note> <anchor id=a218.20>hans, hafðe þar varð-veitt á Gaulom.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=10.3><anchor id=a218.21><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórbi&aolig;rn vas ríkr herser í Norege í Fiala-fylke: hann vas <anchor id=a219.1><pb id=pb219 n=219><note place=margin>[300: v. 9.]</note>Ormars son: hann átte Hillde, Ulfars dóttor ok Þórunnar Gr&oeacute;-ningja-riúpo.

<p n=10.4><anchor id=a219.2><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Vémundr enn Gamle, son Víkings Skáneyjar-skelmis, mágr <anchor id=a219.3>Biarnar Buno, vas herser ríkr: hans son vas Fróðe, faðer Orms, <anchor id=a219.5>f&aolig;ðor Loptz ens Gamla.&mdash;Frá hónom<note place=apparatus id=an219.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hónom]</ab> Lopte, S.</note> es mart stór-menne komet<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a219.6><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Þorlákr enn Helge, Brandr bp, ok Póll bp<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=10.5><anchor id=a219.7><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórviðr, son<note place=apparatus id=an219.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>son]</ab> s. (i.e. son), S; &lsquo;f.&rsquo; (i.e. faðer), vell.</note> Ulfars, bróðer Hildar, fór af Vors til Íslannz. <anchor id=a219.8>En Loftr frænde hans gaf hónom land á Breiða-mýre; ok bió hann <anchor id=a219.9>í Vorsa-b&oeacute;. Hans b&aolig;rn vóro þau Hrafn; ok Hallveig, es átte <anchor id=a219.10>Ozorr enn Hvíte: þeirra son vas Þórgrímr Campe.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=10.6><anchor id=a219.11><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórarenn hét maðr, son Þórkels or Alviðro, Hallbiarnar sonar <anchor id=a219.12>H&aolig;rða-kappa. Hann kom skipe síno í Þiórs-ár-ós; ok hafðe <anchor id=a219.13>þiórs-h&aolig;fuð á fram-stafne; ok es þar &aoacute;en við kennd. Þórarenn <anchor id=a219.14>nam land fyr ofan Skúfs-l&oeacute;k til Rauð-ár, ofan með Þiórs-&aoacute;: hans <anchor id=a219.15>dótter vas Heimlaug, es Loptr geck at eiga sext&oelig;gr<note place=apparatus id=an219.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sext&oelig;gr]</ab> S; vi toga, vell.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=11.1><anchor id=a219.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Haraldr Goll-skeggr</hi> hét konungr í Sogne: <anchor id=a219.17>hann átte Solvoro<note place=apparatus id=an219.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Salvoro, S.</note> dóttor Hundolfs iarls, systor Atla <anchor id=a219.18>iarls ens Mióva: þeirra d&oeacute;ttr vóro þær Þóra, es átte Halfdan <anchor id=a219.19>Svarte Upplendinga konungr, ok Þórríðr, es átte Ketill Hello-flage: <anchor id=a219.20>Haraldr Unge vas son þeirra Halfdanar ok Þóro; hónom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a219.21>gaf Haralldr konungr Goll-skeggr nafn sítt ok ríke. Haralldr <anchor id=a219.22>konungr andaðesk fyrst þeirra; en þá Þóra; en Haralldr Unge <anchor id=a220.1><pb id=pb220 n=220><note place=margin>[301: v. 9.]</note>síðast. Þá bar ríket under Halfdan konung; en hann sette yfer <anchor id=a220.2>þat Atla iarl enn Mióva. Síðan feck Halfdan konungr Ragnilldar, <anchor id=a220.3>dóttor Sigurðar Hiartar; ok vas þeirra son Haralldr enn Hárfagre.

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a220.4><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þá es Haralldr konungr geck til ríkes í Norege, ok hann <anchor id=a220.5>mægðesk við Hákon iarl Griótgarz son, feck hann Sygna-fylke<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a220.6>Hákone iarle mage sínom, es<note place=apparatus id=an220.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es]</ab> en, Floam. S.</note> konungr fór í Vík austr; en Atle <anchor id=a220.7>iarl vilde eige af láta ríkeno, fyr an hann fynde Haralld konung. <anchor id=a220.8>Iarlarner þrætto<note place=apparatus id=an220.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> þreytto, S. drógoz at her, S.</note> þetta með kappe, ok drógo her saman. Þeir <anchor id=a220.9>fundosk á Fiolom í Stafa-ness-váge, ok b&aolig;rðosk þar; ok fell Hákon <anchor id=a220.10>iarl, en Atle varð sárr, ok vas hann fluttr í Atla-ey<note place=apparatus id=an220.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Atla-ey]</ab> Floam. S.; Atley, H.</note>, ok dó þar ór<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a220.11>s&aoacute;rom.<note place=apparatus id=an220.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>s&aoacute;rom]</ab> Atle iarl átte efter þriá sono: hét einn Hall&shy;steinn; hann vas ellztr ok vitraztr þeirra br&oelig;ðra; þá Hersteinn; þá Holmsteinn, add. Floam. S., see Bk. I. <hi rend=bold>3</hi>.</note> En efter þat hélt Hásteinn son hans ríkeno, þar til es <anchor id=a220.12>Haralldr konungr ok Sigurðr iarl drógo her at hónom.

<p><anchor id=a220.13>Hásteinn tók þá undan, ok réð til Íslannz-ferðar. Hann átte <anchor id=a220.14>Þóro, Olvés dóttor: Olvér ok Atle vóro syner þeirra. Hásteinn <anchor id=a220.15>skaut set-stockom fyr borð í hafe at fornom sið;&mdash;þeir kvómo á<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a220.16>Stál-fi&aolig;ro<note place=apparatus id=an220.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeir k. ... f. dyre-br. á St.]</ab> thus M&ast; (AM. 515); þeir kómo á Stálfioro fyr Stocks-eyre, H, S.</note> ok vóro hafder fyre dyre-branda á Stocks-eyre&mdash;en <anchor id=a220.17>Hásteinn kom í Hásteins-sund fyr austan Stocks-eyre; ok braut <anchor id=a220.18>þar. Hann nam land miðle Rauð-ár ok Olvus-ár upp til Fyllar-l&oeacute;kjar<note place=apparatus id=an220.6><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> S; Fúla-lækjar, H.</note>; <anchor id=a220.19>ok Breiða-mýre alla upp at Holtom. Hann bió á Stocks-eyre, <anchor id=a220.20>ok Atle<note place=apparatus id=an220.7><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Atle]</ab> Olver, S.</note> son hans efter hann, áðr hann f&oeacute;rðe sik í Traðar-holt.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=11.2.1><anchor id=a220.21>Olvér hét annarr son Hásteins. Hann bió<note place=apparatus id=an220.8><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bió]</ab> kom, vell.</note> at Stiornu-steinom: <anchor id=a221.1><pb id=pb221 n=221><note place=margin>[301, 303: v. 9.]</note>hann andaðesk barn-lauss; en Atle tók efter hann arf allan. <anchor id=a221.2>Leysinge Olvés vas Brattr es bió í Brattz-holte; en Leiðolfr á <anchor id=a221.3>Leiðolfs-st&aolig;ðom. Atle vas faðer Þórðar Dofna, f&aolig;ðor Þórgils <anchor id=a221.4>Errobeins-stiúps<note place=apparatus id=an221.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Erro-]</ab> S; Orra-, Cd.</note>.

<p n=11.2.2><anchor id=a221.5>[S: (Breiða-mýre alla upp at Holtom), ok bió á Stiorno-steinom,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a221.6>ok svá Olvér son hans efter hann.&mdash;Þar heita nú Olvés-staðer<note place=apparatus id=an221.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Olves-topter, Floam. S.</note>. <anchor id=a221.7>Olvér hafðe land-nám allt fyr útan Gríms-&aoacute;, Stocks-eyre ok Ás&shy;gautz-staðe; en Atle átte allt miðle Gríms-ár ok Rauð-ár; hann <anchor id=a221.8>bió í Traðar-holte. Olvér andaðesk barn-lauss, Atle tók efter hann <anchor id=a221.10>land ok lausa-fé; hans leysinge var Brattr, etc.]<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=11.3><anchor id=a221.11><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hallsteinn hét maðr, es fór or Sogne til Íslannz, mágr <anchor id=a221.12>Hásteins: hónom gaf hann (enn) ýtra hlut Eyrar-backa: hann <anchor id=a221.13>bió á Fram-nese: hans son vas Þórsteinn, faðer Arngríms, es <anchor id=a221.14>vegenn vas at fauska-grefte: hans son vas Þórbi&aolig;rn á Fram-nese.

<p n=11.4><anchor id=a221.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórer, son Ása hersiss, Ingiallz sonar, Hróallz sonar<note place=apparatus id=an221.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hróallz s.]</ab> add. S.</note>, fór til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a221.16>Íslannz, ok nam Kall-nesinga-hrepp allan upp frá Fyllar-l&oeacute;k<note place=apparatus id=an221.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> S; -l&oelig;kjar, Cd.</note>; ok <anchor id=a221.17>bió at Sel-forse: hans son vas Tyrfingr<note place=apparatus id=an221.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Þór., m. Tyrf.]</ab> S; om. H.</note>, faðer Þóríðar, móðor <anchor id=a221.18>Tyrfings, f&aolig;ðor Þórbiarnar prestz, ok Hámundar p(restz) í Goð-d&aolig;lom.

<p n=11.5><anchor id=a221.20><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hroðgeirr enn Spake ok Od<hi>d</hi>geirr bróðer hans vóro Vestmenn<note place=apparatus id=an221.6><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vóro Vestmenn]</ab> add. M&ast;.</note>,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a221.21>es þeir Finnr enn Auðge ok Hafnar-Ormr keypto<note place=apparatus id=an221.7><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> keypte, vell.</note> braut or <anchor id=a221.22>land-náme síno. Þeir n&aoacute;mo Hraungerðinga-hrepp; ok bió Oddgeirr <anchor id=a222.1><pb id=pb222 n=222><note place=margin>[304: v. 10.]</note>í Oddgeirs-hólom: hans son vas Þórsteinn &OElig;xna-broddr, <anchor id=a222.2>faðer Hroðgeirs, f&aolig;ðor Augurs í Camba-kisto: en dótter Hroð-geirs <anchor id=a222.3>ens Spaka vas Gunnvor, es átte Kolgrímr enn Gamle&mdash;þaðan <anchor id=a222.4>ero Kvistlingar komner<note place=apparatus id=an222.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>komner]</ab> add. S.</note>.

<p n=11.6><anchor id=a222.5><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Onundr Bíldr, es fyrr vas geteð, nam land fyr austan Hróars-l&oeacute;k,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a222.6>ok bió í Onundar-holte. Frá hónom es mart stórmenne <anchor id=a222.7>komet<note place=apparatus id=an222.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok bió ... komet]</ab> add. S.</note>, sem fyrr es getið<note place=apparatus id=an222.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Instead of sem fyrr es getið, M&ast; adds&mdash;Ion bp enn helge, ok Þorlákr bp enn fyrre, Ión Lopts son, Are enn Fróðe, Hallr í Hólom.</note>.

<p n=12.1><anchor id=a222.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ozorr</hi> enn <hi rend=sc>Hvíte</hi> hét maðr, son Þórleifs or Sogne. <anchor id=a222.9>Ozorr vá víg í véom á Uppl&aolig;ndom, þá es hann vas í <anchor id=a222.10>bruðf&aolig;r með Sigorðe Hrísa<note place=apparatus id=an222.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Risa, H, S.</note>: fyrer þat varð hann land-fl&oeacute;mðr til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a222.11>Íslannz; ok nam fyrst &aolig;ll Holta-l&aolig;nd, miðle Þiór<hi>s</hi>-ár ok Hrauns-l&oeacute;kjar. <anchor id=a222.12>Þá vas hann siautián<note place=apparatus id=an222.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> xv, Floam. S.</note> vetra es hann vá víget. Hann feck <anchor id=a222.13>Hallveigar Þórviðar dóttor: þeirra son vas Þórgrímr Campe, faðer <anchor id=a222.14>Ozorar, f&aolig;ðor Þórbiarnar, f&aolig;ðor Þórarens, f&aolig;ðor Gríms Tófo<note place=apparatus id=an222.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Tófo]</ab> Ioro-, Floam. S.</note> <anchor id=a222.15>sonar.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=12.2><anchor id=a222.16><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ozorr bió í Campa-holte. Hans leysinge vas B&aolig;ðvarr, es <anchor id=a222.17>bió at<note place=apparatus id=an222.7><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> í, S.</note> B&aolig;ðvars-toftom við Víðe-skóg; hónom gaf Ozorr hlut í <anchor id=a222.18>skógenom; ok skilðe ser efter hann barn-lausan. Orn at Vélu-gerðe<note place=apparatus id=an222.8><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Velv-, vell. here; Vælu-, S.</note>, <anchor id=a222.19>es fyrr es geteð, stefnde B&aolig;ðvare um sauða-t&aolig;ko. Því <anchor id=a222.20>handsalaðe B&aolig;ðvarr Atla Hásteins syne fé sítt; en hann únýtte<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a222.21>mál<note place=apparatus id=an222.9><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mál]</ab> S; fé sitt, vell.</note> fyrer Erne. Ozorr andaðesk þá es Þórgrímr vas ungr<note place=apparatus id=an222.10><ab type=textRef>ungr]</ab> S; undr, vell.</note>. Þá <anchor id=a223.1><pb id=pb223 n=223><note place=margin>[305: v. 10.]</note>tók Hrafn Þórviðar son við fiár-varð-veizlo Þórgríms. Efter andlát <anchor id=a223.2>B&aolig;ðvars talðe Hrafn til Víðe-skógs<note place=apparatus id=an223.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-skógs]</ab> H, S.</note>, ok bannaðe Atla; en Atle <anchor id=a223.3>þóttesk eiga. Þeir Atle fiórer fóro efter viðe; Leiðolfr fór með <anchor id=a223.4>hónom; smala-maðr sagðe Hrafne þat; en hann reið efter þeim<note place=apparatus id=an223.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeim]</ab> honom, S.</note> <anchor id=a223.5>með tionda<note place=apparatus id=an223.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> átta, S.</note> mann. Þeir fundosk í Orrosto-dale, ok b&aolig;rðosk þar.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a223.6>Þar<note place=apparatus id=an223.4><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> tveir, S.</note> fello húskarlar Hrafns fiórer; en sialfr hann varð sárr miok. <anchor id=a223.7>Einn fell Atla húskarl; en hann varð sárr bana-s&aoacute;rom, ok reið <anchor id=a223.8>heim. Onundr Bildr skilðe þá.

<p n=12.2.1><anchor id=a223.9>Þórðr Domne<note place=apparatus id=an223.5><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Domne]</ab> thus; Dofne, S. nio ... vas hann] S; homoiotel. in vell.</note>, son Atla, vas þá nio vetra; en þá vas hann fimtán <anchor id=a223.10>vetra, es Hrafn reið til skips í Einars-h&aolig;fn. Hann reið heim um<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a223.11>nótt, ok vas í blárre k&aoacute;po. Þórðr sat fyrer hónom við Hauga-vað <anchor id=a223.12>skamt frá Traðar-holte, ok vá hann þar með spióte&mdash;þar es Hrafns-haugr <anchor id=a223.13>fyr austan g&aolig;to; en fyr vestan Hásteins-haugr, ok Olvés-haugr, <anchor id=a223.14>ok Atla-haugr<note place=apparatus id=an223.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> hofet, S.</note>. Vígen fellosk í faðma. Þórðr varð frægr <anchor id=a223.15>af þesso. Hann feck þá Þórunnar dóttor Ásgeirs Austmanna-skelmis;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a223.16>es drap skips-h&aolig;fn<note place=apparatus id=an223.7><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> -skelfis, S.</note> Austmanna í Gríms-ár-óse, fyre rán <anchor id=a223.17>þat es hann vas rændr í Norege.

<p n=12.2.2><anchor id=a223.18>Þórðr hafðe þá tvá vettr<note place=apparatus id=an223.8><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> austr, S.</note> ok tottogo, es hann keypte skip í <anchor id=a223.19>Knarrar-sunde, ok vilde heimta arf sínn. Þá fal hann fé mikit; <anchor id=a223.20>því vilde Þórunn eige fara, ok tók hon við bue í Traðar-holte<note place=apparatus id=an223.9><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> ok tók þá með londom, S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a223.21>Þórgils, son Þórðar vas þá tve-vetr. Skip Þórðar hvarf, ok spurðesk <anchor id=a223.22>ecke til. Vetre síðarr kom Þórgrímr Erro-beinn<note place=apparatus id=an223.10><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> E<hi rend=sc>r</hi>&aolig;-, vell. (here).</note> til ráða með <anchor id=a224.1><pb id=pb224 n=224><note place=margin>[306: v. 10.]</note>Þórunne. Hann vas son Þórmóðar, ok Þóríðar Ketilbiarnar dóttor. <anchor id=a224.2>Hann feck Þórunnar, ok vas þeirra son Hæringr.

<p n=12.3><anchor id=a224.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Óláfr Tvennum-brúne<note place=apparatus id=an224.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Hole for <hi>Tve</hi>.</note> hét maðr; hann fór af Lofot til <anchor id=a224.4>Íslannz. Hann nam Skeið &aolig;ll miðle Þiórs-ár ok<note place=apparatus id=an224.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok]</ab> til, S.</note> Sand-l&oeacute;kjar. <anchor id=a224.5>(Hann vas hamramr<note place=apparatus id=an224.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hann vas hamr.]</ab> S; hole in the vell.</note> miok.) Óláfr bió á Óláfs-v&aolig;llom.&mdash;Hann liggr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a224.6>í Brúna-hauge under V&aolig;rðo-felle. Óláfr <sic>át(te</sic> Áshilde, ok vas <anchor id=a224.7>þeirra) son Helge Trauste; ok Þórer Drífa, faðer Þórkels Gollcars, <anchor id=a224.8>f&aolig;ðor Orms, f&aolig;ðor Helgo, móðor Oddz (Hallvarz sonar. Vaðe) <anchor id=a224.9>vas enn þriðe son Óláfs, faðer Gerðar.

<p n=12.4><anchor id=a224.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórgrímr Erro-beinn<note place=apparatus id=an224.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Orra-, vell.</note> lagðe hug á As-hilde, síðan Óláfr (vas<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a224.11>dauðr; en Helge <sic>T)rauste</sic> vandaðe um. Hann sat fyrer Þórgríme <anchor id=a224.12>við gatna-mót fyr neðan Áshildar-mýre. Helge bað hann láta af <anchor id=a224.13>kv&aoacute;mom. Þórgrímr kvazk eige hafa barna-skap. Þeir b&aolig;rðosk, <anchor id=a224.14>ok fell Þórgrímr. Áshildr spurðe hvar Helge hefðe veret. Hann <anchor id=a224.15>kvað víso:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a224.16>Var-ek þar er fell til Fyllar ...
</lg>

<p n=12.4.1><anchor id=a224.17>Áshildr kvað hann hafa h&oelig;gget ser h&aolig;foðs-bana. Helge tók ser, <anchor id=a224.18>far í Einars-h&aolig;fn. Hæringr, son Þórgríms, vas þá sextán vettra. <anchor id=a224.19>Hann reið í H&aolig;fða, at finna Teit Gizorar son með þriðja mann<note place=apparatus id=an224.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Giz. ... mann]</ab> add. S. <ab type=textRef>Giz. son]</ab> Ketilbiarnar son, Floam. S.</note>. <anchor id=a224.20>Þeir Teitr riðo fimtán, at banna Helga far. Þeir Helge m&oeacute;ttosk í<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a225.1><pb id=pb225 n=225><note place=margin>[308: v. 11.]</note>Merkr-hraune<note place=apparatus id=an225.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Mork, S; M<hi rend=sup>s</hi>k, Cd. -hvál] -hraun, S.</note> upp frá M&aolig;rk (við) Helga-hvál. Þeir Helge vóro <anchor id=a225.2>átta saman, komner af Eyrom<note place=apparatus id=an225.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>komner af E.]</ab> add. S.</note>. Þar fell Helge, ok maðr með <anchor id=a225.3>hónom; ok einn af (þeim) Teite. Í faðma fellosk víg þau. Sonr <anchor id=a225.4>Helga vas Sigurðr enn Land-verske, ok Skefill enn Hauk-d&oeacute;lske, <anchor id=a225.5>faðer Helga Dyrs, es barðesk við Sigurð son Liótz L&aolig;ngo-baks í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a225.6>&OElig;xar-ár-holme<note place=apparatus id=an225.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> -holma, S.</note> á Alþinge. Um þat orte Helge þetta:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a225.7>Band er á h&oelig;gre hende ...
</lg>

<p n=12.4.2><anchor id=a225.8>Hrafn vas annarr son Skefils, faðer Gríms, f&aolig;ðor Ásgeirs, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a225.9>Helga.

<p n=12.5><anchor id=a225.10><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þróndr Miok-siglande, Biarnar son, bróðer Eyvindar Aust&shy;mannz,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a225.11>es fyrr vas geteð: hann vas í Hafrs-firðe á mót Harallde <anchor id=a225.12>konunge, ok varð síðan land-flótte til Íslannz síð land-náma-tíðar. <anchor id=a225.13>Hann nam land miðle Þiórs-ár ok Lax-ár, ok upp til Kalf-ár, ok <anchor id=a225.14>til Sand-l&oeacute;kjar: hann bió í Þróndar-holte. Hans dótter vas Helga, <anchor id=a225.15>es Þórmóðr Skafte átte.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=13.1><anchor id=a225.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Olver Barna-karl</hi> hét maðr ágætr í Norege. <anchor id=a225.17>Hann vas víkingr mikell. Hann lét eige henda b&aolig;rn <anchor id=a225.18>á spiótz-oddom, sem þá vas víkinga siðr&mdash;því vas hann Barna-karl <anchor id=a225.19>kallaðr. Hans syner vóro þeir Steinolfr, faðer Uno<note place=apparatus id=an225.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> S; Vnv<hi rend=sup>s</hi>, vell.</note>, es átte <anchor id=a225.20>Þórbi&aolig;rn Laxa-karl; ok Einarr, faðer Ófeigs Grettis, ok Óleifs<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a225.21>Breiðs, f&aolig;ðor Þórmóðar Skafta. Steinmóðr vas enn þriðe son <pb id=pb226 n=226><note place=margin>[309: v. 11.]</note>Olvés, faðer Conals, f&aolig;ðor Aldísar ennar Barreysko, es Oleifr<note place=apparatus id=an226.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> S; Olafr, vell.</note> <anchor id=a226.1>Feilan átte. Son Conals vas Steinmóðr, faðer Halldóro es átte <anchor id=a226.2>Eilífr, son Ketils ens Einhenda.

<p n=13.2><anchor id=a226.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þeir frændr, Úfeigr Grettir ok Þórmóðr Skafte, fóro til <anchor id=a226.5>Íslannz, ok vóro enn fyrsta vettr með Þórbirne Laxa-karle, máge<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a226.6>sínom. En um váret gaf hann þeim Gnúp-verja-hrepp, Úfeige <anchor id=a226.7>enn ýtra hlut á miðle Þver-ár ok Kalf-ár; ok bió á Úfeigs-st&aolig;ðom <anchor id=a226.8>hiá Steins-holte. En Þórmóðe gaf hann enn eystra hlut; ok bió <anchor id=a226.9>hann í Skafta-holte. D&oeacute;ttr Þórmóðar vóro þær, Þórv&aolig;r, móðer <anchor id=a226.10>Þórod<hi>d</hi>z Goða, f&aolig;ðor Skafta<note place=apparatus id=an226.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> laug-Skapta, S.</note>; ok Þórvé, móðer Þórsteins Goða,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a226.11>f&aolig;ðor<note place=apparatus id=an226.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f&aolig;ðor]</ab> &lsquo;f.&rsquo; om. vell.</note> Biarna ens Spaka.

<p><anchor id=a226.12>Úfeigr fell fyrer Þórbirne Iarla-kappa í Grettis-geil hiá Hæle. <anchor id=a226.13>Dótter Úfeigs vas Aldís, móðer Valla-Branz.

<p n=13.3><anchor id=a226.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórbi&aolig;rn Laxa-karl nam Þiórs-ár-dal allan, ok Gnúp-verja-hrepp <anchor id=a226.15>allan ofan til Kalf-ár; ok bió enn fyrsta vetr at Mið-húsom.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a226.16>Hann hafðe þriár vetr-setor áðr hann kom í Haga. Þar bió hann <anchor id=a226.17>til dauða-dags<note place=apparatus id=an226.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> -dax, vell.</note>. Hans syner vóro þeir, Otkell í Þiórs-ár-dale; ok <anchor id=a226.18>Þórgils, faðer Þórkotlo; ok Þórkell Trandill<note place=apparatus id=an226.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórkell Trandill]</ab> thus, by help of S; ok Þorkels Trandels, Cd.</note>, faðer Gauks í St&aolig;ng; <anchor id=a226.19>Otkatla vas móðer Þórkotlo, móðor Þórvallz, f&aolig;ðor Dollo, móðor <anchor id=a226.20>Gizorar byscops.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=13.4><anchor id=a226.21><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Brondolfr<note place=apparatus id=an226.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> S; Bryniolfr, H.</note> ok Márr, Naddoz syner ok Iórunnar, dóttor Olvés <anchor id=a227.1><pb id=pb227 n=227><note place=margin>[310: v. 11.]</note>Barna-karls, kómo til Íslannz snemma lannz-bygðar. Þeir n&aoacute;mo <anchor id=a227.2>Hruna-manna-hrepp, svá sem vatn-f&aolig;ll deila þannveg. Brondolfr<note place=apparatus id=an227.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Brond.]</ab> Bryniolfr, vell.</note> <anchor id=a227.3>bió at Berg-hyl: hans syner vóro þeir, Þórleifr, faðer Brondolfs, <anchor id=a227.4>f&aolig;ðor Þórkels Skota-Collz, f&aolig;ðor Þórarens, f&aolig;ðor Hallz í Hauka-dale, <anchor id=a227.5>ok Þórláks, f&aolig;ðor Rúnolfs, f&aolig;ðor Þórláks byscops. Márr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a227.6>bió á Márs-&aolig;æðom: hans son vas Beiner, faðer Colgrímo, móðor <anchor id=a227.7>Skeggja, f&aolig;ðor Hialta.

<p n=13.5><anchor id=a227.8><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórbi&aolig;rn Iarla-kappe hét maðr Nor&oeacute;nn. Hann fór af Ork&shy;neyjom <anchor id=a227.9>til Íslannz. Hann keypte land í Hruna-manna-hrepp at <anchor id=a227.10>Máve Naddotz syne<note place=apparatus id=an227.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Mave Naddoddz s., S; here the last vell. leaf ends. </note>, allt fyr neðan Sels-l&oeacute;k á miðle Lax-á<note place=apparatus id=an227.3><ab type=textRef>Lax-á]</ab> Laxár, S.</note>. Hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a227.11>bió at<note place=apparatus id=an227.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> S; í, Cd. Sviðo-cára, S.</note> Hólom. Hans syner vóro þeir Solmundr, faðer Brenno-Cára; <anchor id=a227.12>ok Þórmóðr, faðer Finno, es átte Þórormr í Karla-firðe: <anchor id=a227.13>þeirra d&oeacute;t<hi>t</hi>r Alfgerðr, móðer Gestz <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Valgerðar, m. Þorleifs Beis&shy;kallda<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>....

<p n=13.6><anchor id=a227.15><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórbrandr, son Þórbiarnar ens Oarga, ok Ásbrandr son hans,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a227.16>kómo til Íslannz síð lannáma-tíðar; ok vísaðe Ketilbi&aolig;rn þeim til <anchor id=a227.17>land-náms fyr ofan Múla þann es framm gengr hiá Stacks-&aoacute;, ok til <anchor id=a227.18>Kallda-kvíslar; ok bioggo í Hauka-dale.

<p n=13.7><anchor id=a227.19>Þeim þótte land of lítið; es Tunga en vestre<note place=apparatus id=an227.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> þau lond, S. Tungan eystre, S (better?).</note> vas þá bygð. Þá <anchor id=a227.20>ióko þeir land-nám sítt, ok n&aoacute;mo enn &oelig;fra hlut Hruna-manna-hrepps,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a227.21>sión-hending or Múla í Ingiallz-gnúp, fyr ofan Gyldar-haga. <anchor id=a228.1><pb id=pb228 n=228><note place=margin>[312: v. 12.]</note>B&aolig;rn Ásbranz vóro þau Vébrandr ok Arngerðr. Vébrandr <anchor id=a228.2>vas faðer Oddlaugar<note place=apparatus id=an228.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Ollaugar, Cd.</note>, es átte Svertingr Rúnolfs son.

<p n=14.1><anchor id=a228.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ketilbiorn</hi> hét maðr ágætr í Naumu-dale: hann <anchor id=a228.4>vas Ketils son, ok Æso, dóttor Hákonar iarls Griót-garz <anchor id=a228.5>sonar. Hann átte Helgo, dóttor Þórðar Skeggja. Ketilbi&aolig;rn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a228.6>fór til Íslannz þá es landet vas víða bygt með sió; hann hafðe skip <anchor id=a228.7>þat es Elliðe hét. Hann kom í Elliða-ár-ós fyr neðan Heiðe. <anchor id=a228.8>Hann vas enn fyrsta vetr með Þórðe Skeggja máge sínom.

<p n=14.2><anchor id=a228.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En um váret fór hann upp um heiðe at leita ser lannz-kosta.&mdash;Svá <anchor id=a228.10>seger Teitr<note place=apparatus id=an228.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Svá s. Teitr]</ab> add. Sturl. Saga, vii. ch. 12.</note>. Þeir h&aolig;fðo nátt-ból, ok g&oelig;rðo ser skála þar sem<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a228.11>nú heiter Skála-brecka í Blá-skógom. En es þeir fóro þaðan, kómo <anchor id=a228.12>þeir at &aoacute; þeirre es þeir k&aolig;lloðo &OElig;xar-&aoacute;, þvi at þeir týndo þar í <anchor id=a228.13>&oelig;xe sínne. Þeir &aoacute;tto dv&aolig;l under fiallz-múla þeim es þeir k&aolig;lloðo <anchor id=a228.14>Reyðar-múla: þar l&aoacute;go þeim efter á-reyðar þær es þeir tóko or <anchor id=a228.15>&aoacute;nne.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=14.2.1><anchor id=a228.16>[Sturl. S. vii. <hi rend=bold>12</hi>: En es þeir vóro þaðan skamt farner, þá kómo <anchor id=a228.17>þeir á ár-ís, ok hioggo þar á v&aolig;k, ok felldo í &oelig;xe sína, ok k&aolig;lloðo <anchor id=a228.18>hána af því &OElig;xar-&aoacute;.&mdash;Sú &aoacute; vas síðan veitt í Almanna-gi&aoacute;, <hi>ok</hi> fellr <anchor id=a228.19>nú efter Þing-velle.&mdash;Þá fóro þeir þar til es nú es kallaðr Reyðar-múle: <anchor id=a228.20>þar urðo þeim efter reyðar þær es þeir fóro með,&mdash;ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a228.21>k&aolig;lloðo þar af því Reyðar-múla.]

<pb id=pb229 n=229><p n=14.3><note place=margin>[313: v. 12.]</note>

<anchor id=a229.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ketilbi&aolig;rn nam Gríms-nes allt upp frá H&aolig;scullz-l&oeacute;k, ok <anchor id=a229.2>Laugar-dal allan, ok alla Byscops-tungo, upp til Stocks-ár; ok bió <anchor id=a229.3>at Mos-felle.

<p><anchor id=a229.4>B&aolig;rn þeirra vóro þau, Teitr, ok Þórmóðr, Þórleifr, ok Ketill; <anchor id=a229.5>Þórkatla, ok Oddleif<note place=apparatus id=an229.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Olleif, Cd.</note>, Þórgerðr, Þóríðr. Enn vas son Ketilbiarnar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a229.6>laun-getinn Skæringr.

<p n=14.4><anchor id=a229.7><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ketilbi&aolig;rn vas svá auðigr at lausa-fé, at hann bauð sonom <anchor id=a229.8>sínom at slá þver-tré af silfre í hofet, þat es þeir léto g&oelig;ra. Þeir <anchor id=a229.9>vildo þat eige. Þá ók hann silfre<hi>t</hi> upp á fiallet, á tveimr<note place=apparatus id=an229.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> ii, Cd.</note> yxnom, ok <anchor id=a229.10>Hake þræll hans, ok Bót ambótt hans. Þau f&aoacute;lo féit, svá at eige<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a229.11>hefer fundezk síðan. Hann drap Haka í Haka-skarðe; en Bót í <anchor id=a229.12>Bótar-skarðe.

<p n=14.5><anchor id=a229.13><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Teitr átte Álofo, dóttor B&aolig;ðvars af Vors, Víkinga-Kára sonar: <anchor id=a229.14>þeirra son vas Gizorr Hvíte, faðer Ísleifs byscops, f&aolig;ðor Gizorar <anchor id=a229.15>byscops. Annarr son Teitz (vas) Ketilbi&aolig;rn, faðer Colz<note place=apparatus id=an229.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> Kollz, S.</note>, f&aolig;ðor<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a229.16>Þórkels, f&aolig;ðor Cols Vík-verja byscops.&mdash;Mart stór-menne es frá <anchor id=a229.17>Ketilbirne komet.

<p n=14.6><anchor id=a229.18><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Eyfr&oelig;ðr enn Gamle nam Tungo&apos;-ena-eystre á miðle Kalda-kvíslar <anchor id=a229.19>ok Hvít-ár; ok bió í Tungo. Með hónom kom út Drumb-Oddr <anchor id=a229.20>es bió á Drumb-Oddz-st&aolig;ðom.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=14.7><anchor id=a229.21><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Ásgeirr hét maðr, Ulfs son: hónom gaf Ketilbi&aolig;rn Þórgerðe <anchor id=a229.22>dóttor sína. Henne fylgðo heiman Hlíðar-l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll fyr ofan Hagagarð. <anchor id=a230.1><pb id=pb230 n=230><note place=margin>[314: v. 12.]</note>Hann bió í Hlíð enne ýtre. Þeirra son vas Geirr Goðe; <anchor id=a230.2>ok Þórgeirr, faðer Bárðar at Mos-felle.

<p n=14.8><anchor id=a230.3><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Eilífr Auðge, son Onundar Bíllz, feck Þórk&aolig;tlo Ketilbiarnar <anchor id=a230.4>dóttor; ok fylgðo henne heiman H&aolig;fða-l&aolig;nd; þar bioggo þau. <anchor id=a230.5>Þeirra son vas Þórer, faðer Þórarens Sælings.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=15.1><anchor id=a230.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Veþormr</hi>, son Vémundar ens Gamla, vas herser <anchor id=a230.7>ríkr. Hann st&oelig;ck fyre Haralde konunge austr á <anchor id=a230.8>Iamta-land, ok rudde þar marker til bygða. Holmfastr hét son <anchor id=a230.9>hans; en Grímr systor-son hans. Þeir vóro í vestr-víking, ok <anchor id=a230.10>dr&aoacute;po þar í Suðr-eyjom Ásbi&aolig;rn iarl Skerja-blesa; ok tóko þar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a230.11>at her-fange Álofo kono hans; ok Arneiðe, dóttor hans, ok hlaut <anchor id=a230.12>Holmfastr hána; ok feck hána f&aolig;ðor sínom<note place=apparatus id=an230.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> selde hána í hendr f. s., S.</note>, ok lét vesa ambótt. <anchor id=a230.13>Grímr feck Álofar, dóttor Þórðar Vagg-agða, es iarlenn hafðe <anchor id=a230.14>átta.

<p><anchor id=a230.15>Grímr fór til Íslannz; ok nam Gríms-nes allt upp til Svína-vatz;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a230.16>ok bió í Ondorðo-nese fióra vet<hi>t</hi>r; en síðan at Búr-felle. Hans <anchor id=a230.17>son vas Þórgils, es átte Æso, dóttor Gestz Oddleifs<note place=apparatus id=an230.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Olleifs, Cd.</note> sonar; þeirra <anchor id=a230.18>syner vóro þeir Þórarenn at Búr-felle, ok Iorundr í Miðenge.

<p n=15.2><anchor id=a230.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hallkell, bróðer Ketilbiarnar sam-m&oeacute;ðre, hann fór til Íslannz, <anchor id=a230.20>ok vas með Ketilbirne enn fyrsta vetr. Ketilbi&aolig;rn bauð at gefa<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a230.21>hónom land. Hónom þótte lítil-mannligt, at þiggja land at hónom; <anchor id=a231.1><pb id=pb231 n=231><note place=margin>[316: v. 13.]</note>ok skoraðe á Grim til landa, eða holm-g&aolig;ngo ella. Grímr geck á <anchor id=a231.2>holm við Hallkel, under Hallkels-hólom, ok fell þar; en Hallkell <anchor id=a231.3>bió síðan at Hólom. Hans syner vóro þeir Otkell, es Gunnarr <anchor id=a231.4>Hámundar son vá; ok Oddr at Kiðja-berge, faðer Hallbiarnar, es <anchor id=a231.5>vegenn vas við Hallbiarnar-v&aolig;rðor; ok Hallkell, faðer Hallvarz,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a231.6>f&aolig;ðor Þórsteins, es Einarr Hialtlendingr vá: son Hallkels Od<hi>dz</hi> <anchor id=a231.7>sonar vas Biarne, faðer Hallz, f&aolig;ðor Orms <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f. Bárðar, f. Valgerðar, <anchor id=a231.8>m. Halldóru, er Magnús byscop Gizorar-son átte<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p><anchor id=a231.9>Nú es komet at land-náme Ingolfs; en þeir menn es nú ero <anchor id=a231.10>talðer, hafa bygt í hans land-náme<note place=apparatus id=an231.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en þeir ... bygt í h. land-n.]</ab> add. S.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=16.1><anchor id=a231.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórgrímr Bíldr</hi>, bróðer Onundar Bílz sam-m&oeacute;ðre <anchor id=a231.12>við hann, vas son Ulfs frá Hóle. Hann <anchor id=a231.13>nam &aolig;ll land fyr ofan Þver-&aoacute;, ok bygðe at Bílz-fialle.

<p n=16.2><anchor id=a231.14><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Steinr&oelig;ðr, Mel-patrex son g&aolig;fugs mannz af Írlande,&mdash;hann <anchor id=a231.15>vas leysinge Þórgríms Bílz.&mdash;Hann átte dóttor Þórgríms, ok vas<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a231.16>allra manna vænstr. Hann nam &aolig;ll Vatz-l&aolig;nd; ok bió á Stein&shy;r&oelig;ðar-st&aolig;ðom. <anchor id=a231.17>Hans son vas Þórmóðr, faðer Cars, f&aolig;ðor Þórmoz, <anchor id=a231.18>f&aolig;ðor Branz, f&aolig;ðor Þóres, f&aolig;ðor Branz á Þingvelle<note place=apparatus id=an231.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þóres... Þingvelle]</ab> foðor Þóris er átte Helgu Ións dóttor, S.</note>.

<p n=16.3><anchor id=a231.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hrolleifr, son Einars<note place=apparatus id=an231.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Einars]</ab> emend.; Arnar. s., Cd.</note>, sonar Olvés Barna-karls, kom í Leiro-vág, <anchor id=a231.20>þá es bygt vas allt með sió. Hann nam l&aolig;nd til mótz við<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a231.21>Steinr&oelig;ð, &aolig;ll fyr útan &OElig;xar-&aoacute;, es fellr um Þing-v&aolig;ll; ok bió í <anchor id=a232.1><pb id=pb232 n=232><note place=margin>[317: v. 13.]</note>Heiða-b&oeacute; nockora vettr. Þá skoraðe hann á Eyvind í Kvígo-v&aoacute;gom <anchor id=a232.2>til holm-g&aolig;ngo eða land-s&aolig;lo; en Eyvindr kaus heldr at <anchor id=a232.3>þeir keypte l&aolig;ndom. Eyvindr bió nockora vettr síðan í Heiða-b&oeacute;; <anchor id=a232.4>ok fór síðan á Rosm-hvala-nes til B&oelig;iar-skerja. En Hrolleifr bió <anchor id=a232.5>síðan í Kvígo-v&aoacute;gom; ok es þar heygðr. Hans son vas Svertingr,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a232.6>faðer Gríms L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz at Mosfelle.

<p n=16.4><anchor id=a232.7><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ormr<note place=apparatus id=an232.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ormr]</ab> S; Grímr, Cd.</note> enn Gamle, son Eyvindar iarls, Arnmóðs sonar iarls, <anchor id=a232.8>Nereiðs sonar iarls ens Sínka<note place=apparatus id=an232.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sínka]</ab> Gamla, S. fyrir vestan Varmá til Þver-ár; S.</note>: Ormr nam land á miðle Varm-ár <anchor id=a232.9>ok Þver-ár, um Ingolfs-fell allt; ok bió í Hvamme. Hann átte <anchor id=a232.10>Þórunne, dóttor Ketils Kiol-fara, þess es Fingalcnet barðe í hel:<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a232.11>hon vas afa-syster Gríms ens Háleyska. Þeirra son vas Ormr enn <anchor id=a232.12>Gamle, faðer Darra, faoðor Arnar.&mdash;Eyvindr iarl vas með Kiotva <anchor id=a232.13>Auðga mót Haralde konunge í Hafrs-firðe<note place=apparatus id=an232.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Eyvindr ... firðe]</ab> S; hann var enn á mot H. kge. í Hafrs-firðe, Cd.</note>.

<p n=16.5><anchor id=a232.14><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Alfr enn Egðske<note place=apparatus id=an232.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Ulfr <hi>and</hi> Ezki, Cd.</note> stock fyrer Haralde konunge enom Hárfagra <anchor id=a232.15>af Ogðom or Norege. Hann fór til Íslannz, ok kom skipe síno í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a232.16>þann ós, es við hann es kendr; ok Alfs-óss heiter. Hann nam &aolig;ll <anchor id=a232.17>l&aolig;nd fyr útan Varm-&aoacute;; ok bió at Gnúpom.

<p n=16.6><anchor id=a232.18><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórgrímr Grímolfsson, bróðer hans, kom út með hónom, sá es <anchor id=a232.19>arf tók efter hann; þvi at Alfr átte ecki barn. Son Þórgríms vas <anchor id=a232.20>Eyvindr, faðer Þóroddz Goða, f&aolig;ðor Skafta. Ozorr vas ok son<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a233.1><pb id=pb233 n=233><note place=margin>[318: v. 17.]</note>Eyvindar, es átte Bero, dóttor Egils, Skalla-Gríms sonar. Móðer <anchor id=a233.2>Þórgríms vas Cormlod, dótter Cearvals Íra-konungs.

<p n=16.7><anchor id=a233.3><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þórer Haust-myrkr nam Sel-vág ok Crysu-vík; en Heggr, <anchor id=a233.4>son hans, bió at Váge; en B&aolig;ðmóðr, annarr son hans, vas faðer <anchor id=a233.5>Þórarens, f&aolig;ðor Súganda, f&aolig;ðor Þórvarðar, f&aolig;ðor Þórhildar, móðor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a233.6>Sigurðar, Þórgríms sonar.

<p n=16.8><anchor id=a233.7><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Molda-Gnúps syner bygðo Grinda-vík, sem fyrr es ritið<note place=apparatus id=an233.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> ritað, Cd.</note>.

<p n=16.9><anchor id=a233.8><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Steinuðr en Gamla, frænd-kona Ingolfs, fór til Íslannz, ok vas <anchor id=a233.9>með hónom enn fyrsta vetr. Hann bauð at gefa henne Rosmhvala-nes <anchor id=a233.10>allt fyr útan Hvassa-hraun; enn hon gaf fyrer heklo fleckótta<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a233.11>Enska, ok vilde kaup kalla.&mdash;Henne þótte þat ú-hættara við rift-ingom. <anchor id=a233.12>Steinunne hafðe átt<hi>a</hi> Herlaugr, bróðer Skalla-Gríms: <anchor id=a233.13>þeirra syner<note place=apparatus id=an233.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>syner]</ab> s., Cd.</note> vóro, Niall, ok Arnórr.

<p n=16.10><anchor id=a233.14><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Eyvindr hét frænde ok fóstre Steinunnar; hónom gaf hon <anchor id=a233.15>land miðle Kvígo-vága-biarga ok Hvassa-hrauns. Hans son vas<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a233.16>Erlingr<note place=apparatus id=an233.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Erlingr]</ab> Egill, S. </note>, faðer Þórarens, f&aolig;ðor Sigvatz<note place=apparatus id=an233.4><ab type=textRef>Sigvatz]</ab> Sigmundar, S.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Þór&aolig;rno, móðor Þórbiarnar, <anchor id=a233.17>Arnþiófs-sonar í Crysu-vík; ok Álofar<note place=apparatus id=an233.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Alofu, Cd.</note>, móðor Finnz <anchor id=a233.18>L&aolig;g(sægo) mannz <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>ok Freygerðar, móðor Loptz, f&aolig;ðor Goðlaugs <anchor id=a233.19>smiðs<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=16.11><anchor id=a233.20><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Heriolfr, sá es fyrer vas frá sagt, vas frænde Ingolfs ok fóst-bróðer.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a233.21>Af því gaf Ingolfr hónom land miðle, Reykja-ness ok <anchor id=a233.22>Vágs. Hans son vas Bárðr, faðer Herjolfs, þess es fór til Gr&oeacute;nalannz, <anchor id=a234.1><pb id=pb234 n=234><note place=margin>[320: v. 15.]</note>ok kom í hafgerðingar. Á skipe hans vas Suðreyskr maðr, <anchor id=a234.2>sá es orte Hafgerðinga-dr&aoacute;po. Þar es þetta upphaf:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a234.3>Aller hlýðe osso fulle amra fialla dvalens hallar.
</lg>

<p n=16.12><anchor id=a234.4><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Ásbi&aolig;rn hét maðr, Ozorar son, bróðor-son Ingolfs; hann <anchor id=a234.5>nam land miðle Hrauns-holtz-l&oeacute;kjar ok Hvassa-hrauns, Alfta-nes<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a234.6>allt; ok bió á Skúla-st&aolig;ðom. Hans son vas Egill, faðer Ozorar, <anchor id=a234.7>f&aolig;ðor Þórarens, f&aolig;ðor Óláfs, f&aolig;ðor Sveinbiarnar <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>f&aolig;ðor Ásmundar, <anchor id=a234.8>f&aolig;ðor Sveinbiarnar, f&aolig;ðor Styrkárs, f&aolig;ðor Hafr-Biarnar<note place=apparatus id=an234.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> S omits from f. Hafrbiarnar ... Hawk&apos;s contemporaries.</note>, f&aolig;ðor þeirra <anchor id=a234.9>Þórsteins, ok Gizoror í Seltiarnar-nese<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>.

<p n=17.1><anchor id=a234.10><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1.</ab> Nu es yfer faret um land-n&aoacute;m þau er veret hafa á<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a234.11>Íslande. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>Efter því sem fróðer menn hafa skrifat. <anchor id=a234.12>Fyrst Are prestr enn Fróðe Þórgils son; ok Kolskeggr enn Vitre.

<p n=17.1.1><anchor id=a234.13>En þessa bók ritaða-ek<note place=apparatus id=an234.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ek]</ab> om. Cd. (Iohn Erlendsson, the vellum leaf being lost).</note> Haukr Ellinz sun efter þeirre bók sem <anchor id=a234.14>ritað hafði Herra Sturla Logmaðr, hinn fróðasti maðr: ok efter <anchor id=a234.15>þeirri bók annarri, er ritað hafðe Styrmir hinn Fróði; ok hafða-ek<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a234.16>þat or hvárri sem framarr greindi. En mikill þori var þat es þær <anchor id=a234.17>sogðu eins báðar. Ok því es þat ecki at undra þótt þesse Land-náma-bók <anchor id=a234.18>sé lengri en nockor onnur.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>

<p n=17.2><anchor id=a234.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En þesser land-náms-menn hafa g&aolig;fgaster vereð: <anchor id=a234.20>Í Sunnlendinga-fiórðunge&mdash;Hrafn enn Heimske; Ketill H&oeacute;ngr;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a235.1><pb id=pb235 n=235><note place=margin>[321: v. 15.]</note>Sighvatr Rauðe; Hásteinn Atla son; Ketilbi&aolig;rn enn Gamle; <anchor id=a235.2>Helge Biola<hi>n</hi>; Ingolfr; Aurlygr enn Gamle; Colgrímr (enn) Gamle; <anchor id=a235.3>Bi&aolig;rn Gollbere; Onundr Breið-skeggr.

<p n=17.2.1><anchor id=a235.4>En í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge&mdash;Þórsteinn Hvíte; Brynjolfr enn <anchor id=a235.5>Gamle; Graut-Atle, ok Ketell Þiðranda syner; Hrafnkell Goðe;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a235.6>B&aolig;ðvarr enn Hvíte; Hrollaugr, son Rognvallz iarls; Ozorr, son <anchor id=a235.7>Ásbiarnar, Heyangrs-Biarnar sonar, es Freys-gyðlingar &apos;ro frá <anchor id=a235.8>komner; Ketell enn Fíflske; Leiðolfr Kappe.

<p n=17.2.2><anchor id=a235.9>En í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge&mdash;Auðunn Skokull; Ingimundr <anchor id=a235.10>Gamle; Ævarr; Sæmundr; Eirikr í Goðd&aolig;lom; H&aolig;fða-Þórðr;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a235.11>Helge enn Magre; Eyvindr Þórsteins son; Hámundr Heljar-skinn.

<p n=17.2.3><anchor id=a235.12>En í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge&mdash;Hrosskell; Skalla-Grímr; Sel-Þórer; <anchor id=a235.13>Bi&aolig;rn enn Austr&oeacute;ne; Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg; Auðr en <anchor id=a235.15>Diúp-auðga; Geirmundr Heljar-skinn; Ulfr Skiálge; Þórðr Víkings<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a235.16>son.

<p n=17.3><anchor id=a235.17><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Svá segja fróðer menn at landet yrðe al-bygt á lx vetra, svá at <anchor id=a235.18>eige hefer síðan orðet fiol-bygðra. Þá lifðo enn marger land-náms-menn <anchor id=a235.19>ok syner þeirra.

<p n=17.4><anchor id=a235.20><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Es landet hafðe lx vetra bygt vereð, vóro þesser h&aolig;fðingjar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a235.21>mester á Íslande&mdash;

<p n=17.4.1><anchor id=a235.22>Í Sunnlendinga-fiórðunge&mdash;M&aolig;rðr Gígja; Iorundr Goðe; Geirr <anchor id=a235.23>Goðe; Þórsteinn Ingolfs son; Tungo-Oddr.

<pb id=pb236 n=236><p n=17.4.2><anchor id=a236.1><note place=margin>[322: v. 15.]</note>En í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge&mdash;Egill Skalla-Gríms son; Þórgrímr <anchor id=a236.2>Ceallacs son; Þórðr Geller.

<p n=17.4.3><anchor id=a236.3>En norðr&mdash;Miðfiarðar-Skegge; Þórsteinn Ingimundar son; <anchor id=a236.4>Goðd&oeacute;ler; Hialta-syner; Eyjolfr Valgerðar-son; Áskell Goðe.

<p n=17.4.4><anchor id=a236.5>En í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge&mdash;Þórsteinn Hvíte; Hrafnkell Goðe;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a236.6>Þórsteinn faðer Síðo-Hallz; Þórðr Freys-goðe.

<p n=17.4.5><anchor id=a236.7>Hrafn H&oelig;ngs son hafðe þá l&aolig;gs&aolig;go.

<p n=17.5><anchor id=a236.8><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Svá segja menn, at þesser hafa skírðer vereð land-náms-menn.

<p><anchor id=a236.10>Helge Magre; &OElig;rlygr enn Gamle; Helge Beola<hi>n</hi>; Iorundr enn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a236.11>Cristne; Auðr en Diúp-auðga; Ketill enn Fíflske; ok flester þeir es <anchor id=a236.12>kómo vestan um haf. Héldo sumer vel Cristne til dauða-dags. En <anchor id=a236.13>þat geck ú-víða í ætter; þvi at syner þeirra sumra reisto hof ok <anchor id=a236.14>blótoðo. En landet vas heiðet<note place=apparatus id=an236.1><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> alheidit, S.</note> ner hundraðe vet<hi>t</hi>ra.



<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<!-- END OF BOOK OF SETTLEMENTS -->


<div3 id=en.lib5 n=V lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">


<p n=0.1>V. Here beginneth the Settlement of the <hi rend=sc>South-countrymen&apos;s Quarter</hi>, which is the best for choice land of all Iceland, and the most noble men have dwelt there in both clerks and laymen.

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> The east friths were first settled of all Iceland, but between Horn-frith and Reek-ness was last completely settled, for the wind and the surf prevented the landing of men by reason of the lack of havens and want of harbours. Some of them that first came out dwelt nearest <pb id=pb200a n=200>to the fells and marked the quality of the land there, because the live-stock would always be trying to get from the foreshore to the fells. The men that came out later thought that they that had first come out had taken in settlement too much land. But king Harold Fairhair made peace between them on these terms, that no man should take in settlement more land than he and his shipmates could carry fire round in one day.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> When the sun was in the east the fire should be kindled; and they must make [them] smoke so that one might be seen from the other; and the fire that was made in the east must burn all day to night-fall. They must walk from this fire [i. e. start from the eastern fire] until the sun was in the west, and make another fire there.

<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf</hi>, the son of Hare-wolf Horn-breaker, and his brother Anlaf were kings of the Uplands.

<p>With them was Flan the poet, the son of Heor, who was born and bred up north in More on an island a short way from Borgund, which is called Iosur-heath. Flan went to Denmark to visit king Ey-stan, and got there great honour for his skill in poetry, so that the king gave him his daughter.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thrase</hi> was the son of Thor-wolf Horn-breaker. He went from Haurda-land to Iceland, and took land between Iockle-river and Cold-cleft-river, and dwelt at Bell-brink, which is now called Thrase-stead, a short way east from the force <hi>or</hi> water-fall; but Thrase&apos;s tomb is on the west of Force-water, rather near the river on Drong-slope under the peak, and a slip hath fallen over it.

<pb id=pb201a n=201><p>Gar-mund was the son of Thrase. [He was] the father of Thor-beorn, the father of Brand, the father of Sceg, the father of Bollo of Shaw, the father of Sceg, the father of Hilda, whom Nial, Sig-mund&apos;s son of Shaw, had to wife. Their son was Sceg, the father of Ey-wolf, the father of Brand that now dwelleth at Shaw.

<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Raven the Fool</hi> was the name of a man of birth, the son of Wal-gard, the son of We-mund Ordla-car, the son of Thor-wolf Wag-neb, the son of Hrod-rec Ring-slinger, the son of Harold War-tooth, king of the Danes. He came out from Throwend-ham to Iceland, and took land between Cold-cleft-river and Lamb-fell-water. He dwelt at [East] Rift-fell. His children were Helge Blue-rot, and Frey-gerd, and Eor-wend gode.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>As-gar</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Os-gar Cneif</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Anlaf the White, the son of Scaering, the son of Thor-wolf. His mother was Thor-hild, the daughter of Thor-stan Barrow-breaker. As-gar came to Iceland and took land in settlement between Selia-lands-river and Lamb-fell-water, and dwelt at the place that is called Waste <hi>or</hi> the Desert. His sons were Eor-wend and Thor-kell, the father of Og-mund, the father of bishop John. A daughter of As-gar&apos;s was Helga, the mother of Thor-wen. As-gar left off <hi>or</hi> put away sacrifices of his own free will.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-gar the Haurdish</hi>, the son of Bard Blending-horn, came from Wiggia in Throwend-ham to Iceland. He bought land of As-gar <pb id=pb202a n=202>Cneif, between Lamb-fell-water and Irish-river, and dwelt at Holt. A few winters later he took to wife As-gerd, the daughter of Asc the Dumb, and their sons were Thor-grim the Big, and Thore of Holt, the father of Thor-laf Crow and Scaur-Gar.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Unfey</hi> was the name of a nobleman in Ream-dale-folk. He was at odds with king Harold, wherefore he made ready to go to Iceland. He had to wife As-gerd, the daughter of Asc the Dumb. When he was bound to Iceland, king Harold sent a man to him and had him slain, but As-gerd went forth with their children, and with her her bastard brother, whose name was Thor-wolf. As-gerd took land in settlement between Shiel-lands-mull and Mark-fleet, and all Lang-ness up to Mare-rock, and dwelt north on Caith-ness. The children of Unfey and As-gerd were these: Thor-gar Gollne, and Thor-stan Split-beard, Thor-beorn the Quiet, and Alofa Ellidi-shield, whom Thor-berg Corn-mull had to wife. Their children were Ey-stan and Haf-Thora, whom Eid [Aed] Scegsson had to wife. Thor-borg was Unfey&apos;s daughter. Fin Oht-kellson had her to wife.

<p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf</hi>, the brother of As-gerd, took land by her rede west of Fleet, between both Feud-waters, and dwelt at Thor-wolf&apos;s-fell. With him was brought up Thor-gar Gollne, the son of As-gerd, and he dwelt there afterwards. He was the father of Nial, that was burnt in his house and eight men with him at Berg-thor&apos;s-hillock.

<p n=3.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>As-beorn</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Os-beorn</hi>, the son of Reed-Cetil, and <hi rend=sc>Stan-fin</hi>, his <pb id=pb203a n=203>brother, took land in settlement above Cross-water, east of Fleet. Stan-fin dwelt at Stan-fin&apos;s-stead, and there is no man come from him. As-beorn hallowed his settlement to Thor <hi>or</hi> Thunder, and called it Thor&apos;s-mark. His son was Cetil the Rich, that had to wife Thor-gerd, Gollne&apos;s daughter. Their children were these: Thor-beorn and As-gerd.

<p n=3.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Here-wolf</hi>, the son of Bard, the son of Ba-rec, the brother of Hall-grim Singe-log, first settled at West-men&apos;s-isles, and dwelt at Here-wolf&apos;s-dale, inside Egi&apos;s-door, where now is the lava-field. His son was Orm the [...], that dwelt at Orm-stead down below the Cliff, where it is now all blighted, and alone owned all the islands that lie off Ey-sands; and there was a fishing-stead there before, but no winter abode. Orm had to wife Thor-gerd, the daughter of Ord Cold-mouth. Their daughter was Hall-dora, whom Eilif, the son of Field-Brand, had to wife.

<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil Hong</hi> [Salmon] was the name of a nobleman of Neam-dale-folk, the son of Thor-kell the earl of the Neam-dale-men and Regin-hild, the daughter of Cetil Salmon of Ravenist, the son of Hall-beorn Half-troll. Cetil dwelt in Neam-dale at the time when king Harold Fairhair sent Hall-ward Hard-farer and Sig-tryg Fast-farer to [slay] Thor-wolf, Qweld-wolf&apos;s son, the kinsman of Cetil; and Cetil gathered a company together, and was minded to help Thor-wolf; but king Harold went the upper way over Ellide&apos;s tarbert, and got him a ship in Neam-dale, and so went north to Alost in Sand-ness, and put to <pb id=pb204a n=204>death Thor-wolf Qweld-wolf&apos;s son there, and thence went back from the north the outer way, and found many men coming to Thor-wolf&apos;s assistance, and the king sent them home again. A little later Cetil Salmon went north to Torgar and burnt Hrod-rec and Ha-rec, Hild-red&apos;s sons, in their house there, for they had brought Thor-wolf to his death by their false accusations. After that Cetil came to Iceland with his wife and their son. He came with his ship into the mouth of Rang-river, and stayed the first winter at Raven-toft.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Cetil took in settlement all the land between Rang-river and Hrod-gar&apos;s-beck, right up to Reyd-mere, and dwelt at Temple. Cetil had flitted most of his things to Temple. His wife Ing-wen gave birth to a son, and there was born Raven that was afterwards Law-speaker at the place that is now called Raven-toft. Salmon had also under him all the land to the east of East Rang-river and Mere-fell to the beck that runs outside the Broad-bowster and above Thwart-water, all save Duf-thac&apos;s-holt and the Mere <hi>or</hi> Fen. This he gave to a man whose name was Duf-thac [Dubh-thac]. He was very skin-strong [lycanthropic].

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Helge was the name of another son of Salmon&apos;s. He had to wife Wal-dis, Iol-gar&apos;s daughter. Their daughter was Helga, whom Ord-beorn Ash-smith had to wife. After him Ord-beorn&apos;s tomb is called. Their children (Ord-beorn&apos;s and Helga&apos;s) were these: Hrod-wald, Col-ban, and Col-finna, and As-were.

<pb id=pb205a n=205><p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Stor-wolf was the third son of Salmon. His children were these: Worm the Strong, and Ord-kell, and Raven-hild that Gun-here had to wife, the son of Beag. Their son was Ha-mund, the father of Gun-here of Lithe&apos;s-end.

<p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> The fourth son of Salmon&apos;s was named West-here. He had to wife Moeidh [ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ]. Their daughter was As-ny, whom Ufey Grette had to wife. Their children were Os-mund Beardless, Os-beorn, and As-dis [<hi>or</hi> Al-dis], the mother of Field-Brand and of Os-ware <hi>or</hi> As-were, the mother of Helge the Black. One of them was called Asa.

<p n=4.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Here-wolf was the name of the fifth son of Salmon. He was the father of Summer-led, the father of Winter-led the poet. They dwelt at Summer-led-by, which is now called under Brinks. Thang-brand the priest and God-laf, Are&apos;s son of Reek-hills, slew Winter-led for a lampoon.

<p n=4.6.1>[M&ast;: <hi>Double text.</hi> Winter-led made a lampoon on Thang-brand, wherefore Thang-brand slew him as he was turf-cutting, and he defended himself with a turf-cutter against God-laf, Are&apos;s son of Reek-ness, but Thang-brand ran him through with a spear. Song-jaws made an Encomium on God-laf.]

<p n=4.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sea-beorn</hi> [MS.: Swegen-beorn] gode was a son of Raven, Salmon&apos;s son. He had to wife Unn, Sig-mund&apos;s daughter. Their son was Arn-grim.

<pb id=pb206a n=206><p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sigh-wat the Red</hi> was the name of a man of birth in Haloga-land. He had to wife Rand-weig, the daughter of Eilif Lamb, the foster-sister of Ey-wend Poet-spoiler. His mother was Ingi-borg, daughter of Ha-ward, the son of Grit-gard the Haloga earl.

<p>Sigh-wat went to Iceland of his own wish, and took in settlement land by rede <hi>or</hi> counsel of Salmon in his settlement west of Mark-fleet, one horn&apos;s mark above Feud-water, and dwelt at Bowster.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> His son was Sig-mund, the father of Fiddle Mord, that was the greatest chief in Rang-field in his day, and that was held to be a mock-moot to which he did not come. Sig-mund fell over against Sand-hill-ferry, and there is his barrow on the east of Steer-water. Rand-weig was a daughter of Sig-mund, whom Ha-mund, Gun-here&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son was Gun-here of Lithe-end. Sigh-wat&apos;s son was Barec, the father of Thord, the father of Stan.

<p n=5.2.1>[S: <hi>Double text.</hi> Sig-mund, the father of Fiddle Mord, and <hi>of</hi> Sigfus of Lithe, and <hi>of</hi> Lamb in Lamb-stead, and <hi>of</hi> Rand-weig, whom Ha-mund, Gun-here&apos;s son, had to wife, and <hi>of</hi> Thor-gerd, whom Ean-wend Bild of Floe, etc.]

<pb id=pb207a n=207><p>[Another son of Sigh-wat was Barec, the father of Thord, the father of Stan.]

<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eor-wend Gode</hi>, the son of Raven the Fool, dwelt at the west of Fleet, at the place that is now called Swerting-stead. He raised there a great temple. A gore of land lay between Cross-river and Marc-rock; round that land Eor-wend carried fire, and dedicated it to the temple.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Eor-wend took to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thor-beorn the Gaul-wersh [Gaul-man], and the bride-buying was at Scarf-ness at Flose&apos;s, who had all the land between Steer&apos;s-river and Eng-water. Their children were these: Wolf Aur-gode, and Thor-wen, whom Vig-fus of Lithe had to wife, and Wal-gard of Temple. His mother was Thor-laug, the daughter of Raven, Salmon&apos;s son. He [Wal-gard] had to wife Unna, the daughter of Fiddle Mord, after Ram of Cam&apos;s-ness.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-kell Bound-foot</hi> took land in settlement by rede of Salmon round about Three-horn, and dwelt there under the mountain. He was very skin-strong [lycanthropic].  His children were these: Borc Blue-tooth&apos;s-beardie, the father of Starcad of Three-horn, and Thor-wen, whom Orm the Strong had to wife, and Dag-run, the mother of Berse.

<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beag</hi> [ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ] was the name of a man, Salmon&apos;s sworn-brother. He came to Iceland, and was the first winter at Beag-stead, and the second with Salmon. Beag was the son of Red, the son of Ceal-lac, the <pb id=pb208a n=208>son of Cear-val [Cear-bhall], king of the Irish. He took in settlement all Fleet-lithe by rede of Cetil, from above over Broad-bowster to march with Salmon&apos;s land, and dwelt at Lithe&apos;s-end. His sons were these: Gun-here, and Ey-wind of Ey-wind&apos;s-mull, and Snell-stan <hi>or</hi> Stan the Swift, and Hild was his daughter, whom Erne of Weals-garth had to wife.

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Stan the Swift and Sig-mund, the son of Sigh-wat the Red, went forth from out of Eyre and came to Sand-hill-ferry all together, Sig-mund and his mates and Stan; and each wished to cross the river first. Sig-mund and his mates pushed away the house-carles of Stan, and drove them away from the boat. Then Stan came up and hewed Sig-mund his death-blow.

<p n=7.2.1>For this slaughter the sons of Beag were made outlaws all over the Lithe. Gun-here went to Gun-here&apos;s-holt, and Ey-wend-under-Fell eastward to Ey-wend&apos;s-hill, and Stan went to Snell&apos;s-head. It pleased Thor-gerd, Sig-mund&apos;s daughter, right ill that her father&apos;s slayer should be come out thither, and she egged on Ean-wend Bild, her husband, to avenge Sig-mund. Ean-wend went forth with thirty men to Snell&apos;s-head, and set fire to the house there. Snell-stan walked out and gave himself up. They led him down to the Head and there slew him. Gun-here, his brother, took up the case of his slaying. He had to wife Regin-hild, the daughter of Stor-wolf, the sister of Orm the Strong. Ha-mund was their son. They were both [father and son] men of valour, strong and determined. Ean-wend was made an outlaw for the slaughter of Snell-stan. He stayed at home with many men <pb id=pb209a n=209>about him for two winters. Erne of Weals-garth, the brother-in-law of Gun-here, kept an espial upon Ean-wend [for him]. After Yule the third winter Gun-here set upon Ean-wend with thirty men by the guidance <hi>or</hi> connivance of Erne, as Ean-wend was going from the games with twelve men to [where he had left] his horses. They met in Battle-dale. There Ean-wend fell and four men with him, and one of Gun-here&apos;s. Gun-here was in a blue cloak. He rode up along Holt to Steer&apos;s-river, and a short way from the river he fell off horseback, for he was sped by his wounds. But when the sons of Ean-wend, Sig-mund Cleek and Eilif the Wealthy, grew up, they went to their kinsman Fiddle-Mord to get his help to follow up the suit. But Mord said that a suit would hardly stand for outlawed men. They said they were most angry with Erne, who dwelt nearest to them. Mord gave them this plan, that they should get a case for full outlawry [lit. wood-walk case], and so get him driven out of the country-side. Ean-wend&apos;s sons brought an action of pasture against Erne, and he was outlawed to this extent&mdash;that he should fall unhallowed <hi>or</hi> without were-gild before Ean-wend&apos;s sons everywhere except on Weal&apos;s-garth, and within an arrow-shot-length around his land. Ean-wend&apos;s sons kept on the watch for him, but he took good care of himself.

<p n=7.2.2>But once upon a time as Erne was driving neat out of his land, they fell upon him and slew him, thinking that he would have fallen unhallowed <hi>or</hi> without were-gild. Thor-laf Spark, the brother of Erne, gave a fee to Thor-mod, Thiost-here&apos;s son, to get him to hallow Erne [i.e. to prove that he was slain unoutlawed], for Thor-mod was at that time come to Iceland at Eyre. And he shot such a long shot with his <pb id=pb210a n=210>hand-bow [long-bow], that he proved that Erne&apos;s death had taken place inside the bow-shot-length. Then Ha-mund, Gun-here&apos;s son, and Thor-laf took up the case for Erne&apos;s death, but Mord gave help to these brethren. They had not to pay any fine, but were made outlaws in the hundred of Floe. Then Mord asked for Thor-katla, Cetil-beorn&apos;s daughter, on behalf of Eilif, and there followed her from home <hi>as marriage portion</hi> Head-land, and there Eilif dwelt. But as for Sig-mund, he took to wife Arn-gund, the daughter of Thor-stan Drong-carle, and he went forth to live in the east country.

<p>Moreover Mord gave his sister Rand-weig to Ha-mund, Gun-here&apos;s son, and he went then to dwell at Lithe&apos;s-end; and their sons were Gun-here of Lithe&apos;s-end, and Hart, and Helge, and Buck, and Worm Shaw-neb that fell in the Long Serpent with king Anlaf.

<p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hilde</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Hall-gar</hi>, and <hi rend=sc>Leot</hi> their sister, were Irish [S: by kin of the Westernlands]. They came out to Iceland, and took land in settlement between Fleet and Rang-water, all the island country up to Thwart-water. Hilde dwelt at Hilde&apos;s-ey. He was the father of Mo-eidh of Mo-eid&apos;s-hillock. Hall-gar dwelt at Hall-gar&apos;s-ey. His daughter was Mabil, whom Helge, Salmon&apos;s son, had to wife. And Leot dwelt at Leot-stead.

<p n=7.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Duf-thac</hi> [Dubh-thach] of Duf-thac&apos;s-holt was a freedman of these brethren. He was very skin-strong, and so was Stor-wolf, Sal&shy;mon&apos;s son, who then dwelt at Hillock <hi>or</hi> Knoll. They quarrelled over a pasture. A man of second-sight saw one evening a great bear walk <pb id=pb211a n=211>out from Knoll, and a bull from Duf-thac&apos;s-holt, and meet at Stor-wolf&apos;s-field, and fall upon each other angrily; but the bear was the stronger. On the morning there was seen a chine <hi>or</hi> dale where they had met, as if the earth had been turned over there, and it is now called Wave-pit. They were both worn out and lay a-bed.

<p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eilif</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Beorn</hi>, brethren, come to Iceland out of Sogn. Eilif took in settlement Little-point up to Reyd-mere and to Wickings-beck. He had to wife Helga, the daughter of Ean-wend Bild. Their son was Eilif the Younger, who had to wife Ord-ny, the daughter of Ord the Slim. Their daughter was Thor-rid, whom Thor-gar of Ord had to wife. Their daughter was Helga.

<p n=7.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Beorn dwelt at Swine-hay, and took in settlement land up along Rang-river. His children were these: Thor-stan, the father of Grim Bald-holt, and Hall-weig, the mother of Thor-wen, the mother of Gud-run, the mother of Sæ-mund.

<p n=7.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Col</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Colli</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Oht-here Ball. He took land in settlement east of Trout-mere, and Stoti&apos;s-brook west of Rang-river, and Troll&apos;s-shaw to march with the lands of Thor-stan Tent-pitcher, and dwelt at Sand-gill. His son was Egil, that waylaid Gun-here, Ha-mund&apos;s son, hard by Cnafe&apos;s-knolls, and fell there himself and two East-men and Are his house-carle; but Hart, Gun-here&apos;s brother, fell of his company.

<p n=7.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> The sons of Gun-here were these: Grane and Ha-mund. Gun-here fought with Ot-kell at Kirk-by by the garth at Hof, and Ot-kell <pb id=pb212a n=212>and Scam-kell fell there. Gar gode, and Gizor the White, and As-grim, Ellidi-Grim&apos;s son, and Starcad under Three-horns, the son of Bard Blue-beard, the son of Thor-kell Bound-foot, that had to wife Thu-rid, daughter of Egil of Sand-gill,&mdash;these men set forth at leet-tide, and came by night with thirty men to Lithe&apos;s-end; but Gun-here was there and one full-grown man with him. Two men of Gar&apos;s company fell, but sixteen were wounded ere Gun-here fell.

<p n=7.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rolf</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-wolf Red-beard</hi> was the name of a man that took in settlement all Holm-land between Fish-river and Wrong-river, and dwelt at Force. His children were these: Thor-stan Red-neb, that dwelt there after [him], and Thora, the mother of Thor-kell Moon, and Asa, the mother of Thor-ny [Thor-unn], the mother of Thor-gar of Light-water, and Helga, the mother of Ord of Mew-sound. The daughter of Ord was As-borg, whom Thor-stan gode, the father of Beorn the Sage, the father of Sceg, the father of Mark the Law-speaker, had to wife.

<p n=7.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Red-neb</hi> was a great sacrificer, and he sacrificed to the Water-fall <hi>or</hi> Force, and all leavings were carried to the Water-fall. He was also very fore-sighted [i. e. was a seer]. Thor-stan was wont to tell over his sheep, driving them out of the fold twenty hundred [2400], and then <hi>they stopped counting for</hi> the sheep took to leaping the wall. But the reason his sheep were so many was because he could see at harvest-tide how many were fey [doomed, i. e. <hi>to perish during the winter</hi>], and all these he had killed. But the last harvest-tide he was alive he spake at the sheep-fold, &lsquo;Kill ye now what sheep ye will, for I am now fey, or else all the sheep are, or may be both <pb id=pb213a n=213>they and I.&rsquo; And the night he died all the sheep rushed down into the Water-fall and perished there. Helga was the name of his daughter, whom Holge Roe, Ceallac&apos;s son [Cetil son], had to wife.

<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Wolf-gylde</hi> was a mighty herse [lord] of Thela-mark in Norway. He dwelt at Fifle-field in Tinds-dale. His son was As-grim, the father of these&mdash;Thor-grim and Thor-laug. Their mother&apos;s name was Thor-katla, who was called Ringa [Buckle].

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> King Harold Fairhair sent Thor-orm his kinsman out of Thrum in Agd to gather in As-grim&apos;s scot <hi>or</hi> tax which the king asked of him; but he would not pay, though he had sent the king a little before a Geatish horse and much silver, saying it was a gift, but not a tax <hi>or</hi> gild, for he had never paid scot before. The king sent the money back and would not receive it.

<p n=8.2.1>Thor-katla, As-grim&apos;s wife, gave birth to a man-child. As-grim bade them take it out [i.e. expose it]. The thrall who was to dig his grave was sharpening his spade, but the boy was laid down on the floor. Then they all heard, as it were, the boy reciting these lines:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Give me to my mother, the floor is cold for me!
    <l>Where should a child be better, than by his father&apos;s hearth?
    <l>No need to put an edge on the iron nor shear the turf-strips.
    <l>Let the wicked work be, for I shall yet live among men.
</lg>

<p n=8.2.2>Then the boy was sprinkled with water, and called Thor-stan.

<pb id=pb214a n=214><p n=8.2.3>But when Thor-orm came a second time to gather the scot, As-grim called a moot and asked the franklins if they wished to pay the king such scot as was called for. They bade him answer for them, but they did not wish to pay. The moot was hard by a wood, but when they were least ware of him, Thor-orm&apos;s thrall sprang out upon As-grim and killed him. The franklins killed him at once. Thor-stan was then away warring, but when he heard of the slaying of his father, he sold his lands for silver and made ready to go to Iceland out of Gran-mere, east of Sailor&apos;s-ness; but before he set out Thor-stan burnt Thor-orm in his house in Thrum and avenged his father.

<p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Thor-gar was the name of his brother. He was ten winters old at the time Thor-orm had their father killed. He went to Iceland with Thor-stan and Thor-wen, their mother&apos;s sister, and took in settlement Thor-wen&apos;s-neck, and dwelt there afterwards.

<p n=8.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Thor-stan put into Wrong-river-mouth, and took land by rede of Flose above Wicking-brook, and west to march with the land of Beorn of Swine-hay, and dwelt at East Pass.

<p n=8.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> In his days there came out a ship to Rang-river-mouth, whereon was great sickness, and no man would take them in. But Thor-stan went and fetched them, and pitched tents for them at the place which is now called Tilt-booths, and ministered to them himself as long as they lived, and they all died. He was afterwards called Thor-stan Tent-pitcher; but the one of them that lived the last, hid gold and silver and buried it underground, so that nought of it hath ever been found.

<pb id=pb215a n=215><p n=8.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Thor-stan had to wife first Thor-rid, Gun-here&apos;s daughter, the son of Ha-mund. Their children, Gun-here, Thor-hall, Io-stan, and Ior-wend. Afterwards Thor-stan had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Sig-fus of Lithe. Their children, Sceg and Thor-katla, Rand-weig and Arn-thora.

<p n=8.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Now Thor-gar, the brother of Thor-stan, bought Ord <hi>or</hi> Edge-land of Raven, Salmon&apos;s son, both Strands and Warm-dale, and all the Ord <hi>or</hi> Edge between Hrod-gar&apos;s-beck and Wrong-river. He dwelt first at Ord <hi>or</hi> Edge, and had to wife Thor-rid, daughter of Eilif the Younger. Their daughter was Helga, whom Swart, Wolf&apos;s son, had to wife. Their son [was] Lod-mund of Ord, the father of Sig-fus the priest, the father of Sæ-mund the historian.

<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Flose</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Thor-beorn the Gaulwerish [man of Gaula]. He slew three reeves of Harold Fairhair, and went forth afterwards to Iceland, and took land in settlement east of Rang-river, all East Rang-river-field. His daughter was As-ny, the mother of Thor-rid, whom Field-Brand had to wife. The son of Field-Brand was Flose, the father of Colban, the father of Gud-run, whom Sæ-mund the historian had to wife. Floce had to wife Gud-run, Thore&apos;s daughter, the son of Beard-Brord.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Loft the Old, Flose&apos;s sister&apos;s son, went to sacrifice in Gaula, because Flose was out of the peace in Norway. Flose the Northron had to wife Thor-dis the Big, the daughter of Thor-wen the Wealthy, the daughter of Cetil One-hand. Their daughter was As-ny, whom Thor-gar had to wife.

<p n=9.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil One-hand</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Ead-wine <pb id=pb216a n=216>Thin-car. He took in settlement Outer Rang-river-wold above Beck-bottom and east of Steer&apos;s-river, and dwelt at River. He had to wife As-leva, daughter of Thor-gils. Their son was Ead-wine, the father of Bryne-wolf, the father of Berg-thor, the father of Thor-lac.

<p n=9.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil Trout</hi>, the cousin [son of the father&apos;s brother] of Cetil One-hand, took land in settlement down along Steer&apos;s-river, and dwelt at Inner-wold. His son was Helge Roe, that had to wife Holga, daughter of Hrod-wolf [<hi>or</hi> Thor-stan] Red-beard. Their son was Ord Mewe, the father of As-gerd, whom Thor-stan gode had to wife, and of Ord-ny, whom Eilif the Young had to wife.

<p n=9.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Orm</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Worm the Wealthy</hi>, the son of Wolf the Keen, took land in settlement along Rang-river by the counsel of Cetil One-hand. He dwelt at House-garth, and As-kell his son after him; but his son Brand first set up the homestead at Wold. From him are come the <hi rend=sc>Wold-men</hi>.

<p n=9.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Lunan</hi> was the name of a Northron [Norwegian] man, and a great traveller and merchant. It was foretold of him that he should die in a land that was not yet built. Thor-stan went to Iceland in his old age with Thor-gils his son. They took in settlement the upper part of Steer&apos;s-river-holt, and dwelt at Lunan&apos;s-holt, and there is Thor-stan howed. The daughter of Thor-stan was As-laf, whom Cetil One-hand had to wife. Their sons were these: Ead-wine, who was named above, and Eilif, the father of Thor-gar, the father of Sceg, the father of <pb id=pb217a n=217>Sholto in Steer&apos;s-river-dale. He was the father of Ior-wen, the mother of Gud-run, the mother of Einar, the mother of bishop Magnus.

<p n=9.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gund-stan Bear-sarks-bane</hi>, the son of Bale-work Trenail-snout, slew two bear-sarks, one of whom had before slain Grit-gard, the Halega earl, in Solwe inside of Agd-ness. Gund-stan was afterwards shot with a Finnish arrow [charmed <hi>or</hi> venomed] out of the wood as he was in his ship north in [the isle of] Hafne. The son of Gund-stan was Thor-gar, that had to wife Thor-wen the Wealthy, the mother of Cetil One-hand. Their daughter was Thor-dis the Big.

<p n=9.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Red-worm</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Iol-gar</hi>, brethren, came from west over sea to Iceland. They took land in settlement between Steer&apos;s-river and Rang-river. Red-worm took to himself the land east of Red-beck, and dwelt at Wéht-laf&apos;s-holt. His daughter was Arn-borg, whom Swerting, Heor-laf&apos;s son, had to wife. Their children were these: Grim the Law-speaker and Ior-wen. Afterwards Peak, Mould Peak&apos;s son, had Arn-borg to wife, and their children were Hall-stan of Shelf, and Rand-weig, mother of Skafte the Law-speaker, and Gar-ny, mother of poet Raven.

<p n=9.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Iol-gar</hi> [ &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ] took to himself land from outside Red-beck to Stan&apos;s-beck, and dwelt at Iol-gar-stead.

<p n=9.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Os-gar</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>As-gar Hnoccan</hi> <hi>was</hi> the son of Duf-thac [Dubh-thach], the son of Duf-nial [Dubh-niall], the son of Cearval [Cear-bhall], king of the Irish. He took land in settlement between Stan&apos;s-beck and Steer&apos;s-river, and dwelt at Askell&apos;s-head.  His son was Os-mund, the father of Os-gar, the father of Sceg, the father of Thor-wald, <pb id=pb218a n=218>the father of Thor-laug, the mother of Thor-gerd, the mother of bishop John.

<p n=9.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-kell Delve</hi>, the foster-brother of Red-worm, took to himself all the lands between Rang-river and Steer&apos;s-river, and dwelt at Hafe. He had to wife Thor-wen the Island-dweller. Their daughter was Thor-dis, the mother of Sceg, the father of Thor-wald of the Ridge.

<p n=9.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> From thence did Sholto, his son-in-law, get mounts to go to the All-moot, and his eleven men when he came out with Christendom, for no other man dared to do so much by reason of the oppression of Run-wolf, Wolf&apos;s son, that had got Sholto outlawed for blasphemy.

<p>Now are written the men that received and took land in settlement within the Settlement of Cetil Salmon.

<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Lopt</hi>, the son of Worm <hi>or</hi> Orm, the son of Frode [Sage], came from Gaula to Iceland when he was yet young, and took land in settlement beyond Steer&apos;s-river between Red-water and Steer&apos;s-river and up to Scuf&apos;s-beck, and East Broad-mere up to Pillar-holt, and dwelt at Gaula-ware-by [the men of Gaula&apos;s-home] with Ord-ny his mother, the daughter of Thor-beorn the Gaulwerish.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Lopt went abroad every third summer, on behalf of himself and Flose his mother&apos;s brother, to sacrifice at the Temple that Thor-beorn his mother&apos;s father, had kept in Gaula.

<p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn</hi> was a rich herse [lord] of Fiala-folk in Norway. He <pb id=pb219a n=219>was the son of Worm-here. He had to wife Hild, the daughter of Wolf-here and of Thor-wen the Granings&apos;-ptarmigan.

<p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>We-mund the Old</hi>, the son of Wicking the Feller of the Scaneys, the kinsman-in-law of Beorn Buna, was a mighty lord <hi>or</hi> herse. His son was Frode, the father of Worm, the father of Lopt the Old. From him [Lopt] are many great men come.

<p n=10.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wid</hi>, the son of Wolf-here, the father of Hild, came from Wors to Iceland; but Lopt, his kinsman, gave him land in Broad-mere, and he dwelt at Wors-by. His children were these: Raven and Hall-weig, whom Ozor the White had to wife. Their son was Thor-grim Camp.

<p n=10.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-arin</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Thor-kell of All-water, the son of Hall-beorn the Champion of the Haurds. He came in his ship to Steer&apos;s-river-mouth, and had a steer&apos;s head on his fore-stem <hi>or</hi> prow,&mdash;and the river is called after it. Thor-arin took land in settlement above Scuf&apos;s-beck to Red-river down along Steer&apos;s-river. His daughter was Ham-laug, whom Lopt married when he was sixty.

<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Harold Gold-beard</hi> was the name of a king in Sogn. He had to wife Sel-ware, the daughter of earl Hound-wolf, the sister of earl Atle the Slim. Their daughters were these: Thora, whom Half-dan the Black, the king of the Uplanders, had to wife; and Thor-rid, whom Cetil Cave-flag had to wife. Harold the Younger was the son of Half-dan and of Thora. To him king Harold Gold-beard gave his name and realm. King Harold died first of them, and then Thora, and Harold <pb id=pb220a n=220>the Younger last. Then the kingdom passed under king Half-dan, and he set earl Atle the Slim over it. Afterwards Half-dan took to wife Regin-hild, the daughter of Sigurd Hart, and their son was Harold Fairhair.

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> When king Harold came to his kingdom in Norway, and was become kinsman-at-law to earl Hacon Gritgardsson, he gave Sogn-folk to earl Hacon, his father-in-law, when the king went east into Wick. But earl Atle would not yield the earldom till he had seen king Harold. The two earls stood firmly upon their rights, and gathered each an host and met at Fiola in Staff-ness-voe, and fought there; and earl Hacon fell and Atle was wounded, and he was moved to Atl-ey, and there he died of his wounds. And after that <hi rend=sc>Heah-stan</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Ha-stan</hi> his son held his <hi>father&apos;s</hi> earldom till king Harold and earl Sigurd [Hacon&apos;s son] gathered together an host against him. Then Ha-stan made off and got ready to go to Iceland. He had to wife Thora, the daughter of Alwe: Alwe and Atle were their sons. Ha-stan cast his seat-stocks overboard at sea after the  old way. They came up at Stall-shore and were [are] used as door-pillars at Stock&apos;s-eyre, and Ha-stan put into Ha-stan-sound, east of Stock&apos;s-eyre, and wrecked his ship. He took land in settlement between Red-river and Olvus-water up to Fyll-beck, and all Broad-mere up to Holt. He dwelt at Stock&apos;s-eyre, and Atle his son after him before he flitted to Tread-holt <hi>or</hi> Pen-holt.

<p n=11.2.1>Alwe was the name of Ha-stan&apos;s second son. He dwelt at Stern-stan <pb id=pb221a n=221><hi>or</hi> Anchor-rock. He died childless, and Atle took all the heritage after him.

<p>A freedman of Alwe was Brant, that dwelt at Brant-holt, and Leod-wolf of Leod-wolf-stead.

<p>Atle was the father of Thord Domne, the father of Thor-gils, Scar-leg&apos;s step-father.

<p n=11.2.2>[S: <hi>Double text.</hi> Alwe took in settlement all along out to Grim&apos;s-water, Stock&apos;s-eyre, and Asgeat-stead. But Atle held all the land between Grim&apos;s-water and Red-river. He dwelt in Tread-holt. Alwe died childless, and Atle took all the heritage after him&mdash;land and money and chattels.]

<p n=11.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hall-stan</hi> was the name of a man that came from Sogn to Iceland, kinsman-in-law to Ha-stan, who gave him the outer part of Eyre-bank. He dwelt at Forth-ness. His son was Thor-stan, the father of Ern-grim, that was slain when he was digging peat-logs. His son was Thor-beorn of Forth-ness.

<p n=11.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thore</hi>, the son of Ase herse, the son of Ingi-ald, the son of Hrod-wald, came to Iceland and took in settlement all the Rape of Cold-ness up from Fyll-beck, and dwelt at Seal-force. His son was Tyr-fing, the father of Thor-rid, the mother of Tyrfing, the father of Thor-beorn the priest of God-dales.

<p n=11.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-gar the Wise</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Ord-gar</hi>, his brother, were Westmen [i.e. <hi>from Ireland</hi>], to whom Fin the Wealthy and Haven-Worm sold land out of their settlements, took in settlement the Rape of Rawn-garth, <pb id=pb222a n=222>and Ord-gar dwelt at Ord-gar&apos;s-hills. His son was Thor-stan Ox-goad, the father of Hrod-gar, the father of Angor of Comb-cist; but the daughter of Hrod-gar the Wise was Gund-wara, whom Col-grim the Old had to wife. Thence are the <hi rend=sc>Quistlings</hi> come.

<p n=11.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ean-wend Bild</hi>, that was spoken of before, took land in settlement east of Hrod-gar&apos;s-beck, and dwelt at Ean-wend-holt. From him are many great men come, as it is written before.

<p n=12.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ozur the White</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Thor-laf of Sogn. Ozur slew a man in a holy place when he was on Sig-rod the Bastard&apos;s bridal journey, wherefore he was banished the land and [came] to Iceland, and was the first to take in settlement all Holt-land between Sker&apos;s-river and Rawn-brook. He was seventeen years old when he committed the manslaughter. He took to wife Hall-weig, the daughter of Thor-wid. Their son was Thor-grim Camp, the father of Ozur, the father of Thor-beorn, the father of Thor-arin, the father of Grim, Tuft&apos;s son.

<p n=12.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ozur dwelt at Camp-holt. His freedman was Bead-were, that dwelt at Bead-were&apos;s-toft by Willow-shaw. Ozur gave him a share in the shaw, which should come back to himself if he died childless. Erne of Weal&apos;s-garth, as it is spoken of before, summoned Bead-were for sheep-stealing; wherefore Bead-were hand-selled Atle, Hastan&apos;s son, all his goods, but he got the case quashed by Erne. Ozur died while Thor-grim <pb id=pb223a n=223>was yet young, then Raven, Thor-wid&apos;s son, took the wardship of Thor-grim. After Bead-were&apos;s death Raven claimed Willow-shaw, and warned Atle off it, but Atle claimed it as his own. Atle and three men with him went to get wood, and Leod-wolf went with him. A shepherd told Raven of this, and Raven rode after them with ten men. They met in Battle-dale, and fought there. There fell four [S: two] house-carles of Raven, and he himself was sore wounded. One house-carle of Atle&apos;s fell, but he got his death-wound and rode home. Ean-wend Bild parted them.

<p n=12.2.1><hi rend=sc>Thord Domne</hi> [Timber], Atle&apos;s son, was nine years old then; but he was fifteen when Raven rode down to a ship at Einar&apos;s-haven. He was riding home in a blue cloak. Thord lay in wait for him over against Howe-wade <hi>or</hi> Cairn-ford, a short way from Tread-holt, and slew him there with a spear. Raven&apos;s barrow is there on the east of the path, and on the west Ha-stan&apos;s barrow, and Alwe&apos;s barrow, and Atle&apos;s barrow. The manslaughters were squared off. Thord became famous for this deed. And now he took to wife Thor-wen, the daughter of Os-gar Eastmen-smiter, that slew a ship&apos;s crew of Eastmen in the mouth of Grim&apos;s-river, for a robbery that he had suffered in Norway.

<p n=12.2.2>Thord was two-and-twenty years old when he bought a ship in Cog-sound, being minded to gather in his heritage. And now he hid much money [in the earth], wherefore Thor-wen would not go out, but took over the homestead at Tread-holt. Thor-gils, the son of Thord, was <pb id=pb224a n=224>then two winters old. Thord&apos;s ship was lost and never heard of. A winter later Thor-grim Scar-leg came to be reeve for Thor-wen. He was the son of Thor-mod and of Thor-rid, Cetil-beorn&apos;s daughter. He took to wife Thor-wen, and their son was Hæ-ring.

<p n=12.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>An-laf Twin-brow</hi> was the name of a man that went from Lofot to Iceland. He took in settlement all the Course between Steer&apos;s-river and Sheep-brook. He was very skin-strong [lycanthropic]. An-laf dwelt at An-laf&apos;s-wold. He lies in Brune&apos;s-howe under Cairn-fell. An-laf had to wife Ans-hild, and their son was Helge the Trusty, and Thore Dufa, father of Thor-kel Gold-car, the father of Orm, the father of Helge, the mother of Ord, Hall-ward&apos;s son; Wade was the third son of An-laf; [he was] the father of Gerd.

<p n=12.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Thor-grim Scar-leg set his heart upon Ans-hild after An-laf was dead, but Helge the Trusty chid him over it <hi>or</hi> forbade it. He lay in wait for Thor-grim where the ways meet below Ans-hild&apos;s-fen. Helge bade him stop his continual coming to the house. Thor-grim said that he was not a child [to be chid]. They fought, and Thor-grim fell there. Ans-hild asked Helge where he had been. He spoke these verses:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>I was at Fyll-brook where Scar-leg fell:
    <l>I gave Asmod&apos;s [i.e. Thormod&apos;s] heir to Woden.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79 (corrected).]

<p n=12.4.1>Ans-hild said that he struck a blow that would cost him his head. Helge took a passage abroad at Einar&apos;s-haven. Hæ-ring, Thor-grim&apos;s son, was then sixteen winters old. He rode to Head to see Tait, Gizur&apos;s son, with two men. Tait and his men rode fifteen together to prevent Helge from going abroad. Helge and they met at Mark-rawn up above <pb id=pb225a n=225>Mark, over against Helge&apos;s-knoll. There were eight [three] together that rode from Eyre. There fell Helge and a man with him, and one of Tait&apos;s men. The slaying was counted as equal. The son of Helge was Sigurd the Land-wersh [the Man o&apos; Land], and Skefil the Hawk-dale man, the father of Helge Deer, that fought with Sigurd, the son of Leot Long-back, at Ax-water-holm at the All-moot, whereon Helge made this verse:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>There is a band on my right hand.
    <l>I got a wound from [the son of Leot].
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79 (corrected).]

<p n=12.4.2>Raven, the second son of Skefil, was the father of Grim, the father of As-gar, the father of Helge.

<p n=12.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Throwend the Far-sailer</hi> [was] the son of Beorn, the brother of Ey-wind East-man, as was before spoken [III. 13 and 15]. He was at Hafr&apos;s-frith against king Harold, and was afterwards banished the land, [and he came out] to Iceland late in the times of the settlement. He took land in settlement between Steer&apos;s-river and Lax-water, and up to Calf-river as far as Sand-brook. He dwelt at Throwend-holt. His daughter was Helga, whom Thor-mod [Diarmaid?] Shaft had to wife.

<p n=13.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Alwe Bairn-carle</hi> [i.e. the children&apos;s man] was the name of a nobleman in Norway. He was a great wicking. He would not let men cast children on the points of spears, as was the wickings&apos; custom. His sons were Stan-wolf, the father of Unna, whom Thor-beorn Salmon-man had to wife; and Einar, the father of Un-fey Gretti, and of An-laf the Broad, the father of Thor-mod Shaft. Stan-mod was the third <pb id=pb226a n=226>son of Alwe. He was the father of Conall, the father of Alf-dis the Barrey-woman, whom An-laf Feilan had to wife. The son of Conall was Stan-mod, the father of Hall-dor, whom Eilif, the son of Cetil One-hand, had to wife.

<p n=13.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> The kinsmen Un-fey, Grette, and Thor-mod Shaft went out to Iceland, and stayed the first winter with Thor-beorn Salmon-man, their kinsman-in-law; and in the spring he gave them the Rape of the Peek-dwellers. To Un-fey he gave the outer shore between Thwart-water and Calf-river, and he dwelt at Unfey-stead hard by Stan&apos;s-holt; but to Thor-mod he gave the eastern shore, and he dwelt at Shaft-holt. Thor-mod&apos;s daughters were these: Thor-wera, the mother of Thor-ord gode, the father of Long-shaft, and Thor-weh, the mother of Thor-stan gode, the father of Beare the Wise.

<p>Un-fey fell before Thor-beorn the earl&apos;s champion at Grette&apos;s-gill hard by Neck. Un-fey&apos;s daughter was Al-dis, the mother of Weald-Brand.

<p n=13.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn Salmon-carle</hi> took in settlement all Steer&apos;s-river-dale, and all the Rape of the Peek-dwellers down to Calf-river, and dwelt the first winter at Mid-house. He had abode there three winters before he came to Haye, where he dwelt till the day of his death. His sons were these: Ot-kell <hi>or</hi> Oht-cetil of Steer&apos;s-river-dale, and Thor-gils, the father of Ord-katla, and Thor-kell Trandil, the father of Gowk of Stang. Ord-katla was the mother of Thor-katla, the mother of Thor-wald, the father of Dalla [Blind], the mother of bishop Gizor.

<p n=13.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Brand-wolf</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Mar</hi>, sons of Naddod and of <hi rend=sc>Eor-wen</hi>, the <pb id=pb227a n=227>daughter of Alwe Bairn-carle, came to Iceland early in the settling of the country. They took in settlement the Rape of the Men of Rune, as far as the water-parting on that side. Brand-wolf dwelt at Rock-pool. His sons were these: Thor-laf, the father of Brand-wolf, the father of Thor-kell Scot-Coll, the father of Thor-arin, the father of Hall of Hawk-dale, and of Thor-lac, the father of Rune-wolf, the father of bishop Thor-lac.

<p>Mar dwelt at Mar-stead. His son was Beine, the father of Col-grim, the mother of Sceg, the father of Healte <hi>or</hi> Sholto.

<p n=13.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-beorn the Earl&apos;s Champion</hi> was the name of a Northron [Norwegian]. He came out of the Orkneys to Iceland. He bought land in the Rape of the Men of Run of Mar, Naddod&apos;s son, all below Seal-brook between Lax-waters. He dwelt at Hills. His sons were these: Sol-mund, the father of Care o&apos; the Burning, and Thor-mod, the father of Finna, whom Thor-orm of Carle-frith had to wife. Their daughters were Alf-gerd, mother of Gest....

<p n=13.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-brand</hi>, the son of Thor-beorn the Fierce, and <hi rend=sc>Os-brand</hi>, his son, came to Iceland late in the times of the settlement; and Cetil-beorn directed them to a settlement above the Mull that goeth forth hard by Stack&apos;s-water to Cold-fork, and they dwelt in Hawk-dale. They thought their land too small, because West [East] Tongue was already settled; wherefore they enlarged their settlement by taking the upper part of the Rape o&apos; the Men of Rune straightforward [i.e. as the crow flies] from Mull in Ingiald&apos;s-peak down over Gyldes-hay. The <pb id=pb228a n=228>children of Os-brand were these: We-brand and Arn-gerd. We-brand was the father of Ord-laug, whom Swerting, Run-wolf&apos;s son, had to wife.

<p n=14.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil-beorn</hi> was the name of a nobleman in Neam-dale. He was the son of Cetil and of Asa, the daughter of earl Hacon, Grit-garth&apos;s son. He had to wife Helga, the daughter of Thord Beardie. Cetil-beorn came to Iceland when the land was broadly settled along the sea. He had the ship that is called Ellide. He put into the mouth of Ellide&apos;s-river, north of Heath <hi>or</hi> Moor [Blue-shaw-heath]. He stayed the first winter with Thord Beardie, his father-in-law.

<p n=14.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But in the spring he went up over the Heath to seek him good choice of land.&mdash;Thus says Tait. They had a sleeping-place there, and built them a hall at the place that is now called Hall-brink in Blue-shaw. But when they went thence they came to a river, which they called the river Axe-water, because they lost their axe there. They took up their abode for a while under the mull of the hill, which they called Trout-mull, for there they left behind [forgetting them] the river-trout that they took out of the river.

<p n=14.2.1>[<hi>Double text.</hi> But when they had gone a short distance they came to a frozen river, and cut an ice-hole in it, and their axe fell in, whence they called it Ax-water. This water was afterwards led into the All-men&apos;s-rift, and now it runs down along the Ting-wall [Moot-field]. Then they went to where it is now called Trout-mull; there they lost their [catch of] trout, whence they called it Trout-mull.]

<pb id=pb229a n=229><p n=14.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Cetil-beorn took in settlement all Grim&apos;s-ness up from Haus-Coll&apos;s-beck, and all Bath-dale, and all Bishop&apos;s-tongue up to Stack&apos;s-water, and he dwelt at Moss-fell.

<p>Their children were these: Tait and Thor-mod [Diarmaid], Thor-laf and Cetil, Thor-katla and Ord-laf, Thor-gerd, Thor-rid; and yet another son of Cetil, a bastard, was Scoring.

<p n=14.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Cetil-beorn was so rich in money that he bade his sons cast <hi>or</hi> work a cross-beam of silver for the temple that they were about building, and they would not. Then he drove the silver up on the fell behind <hi>or</hi> on two oxen, and Hake his thrall, and Bot his bond-woman. They buried the treasure there, so that it hath never been found since. He killed Hake at Hake-pass, and Bot at Bot-pass.

<p n=14.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Tait had to wife Alof, the daughter of Bead-were of Wors, the son of Wicking Care. Their son was Gizor the White, the father of bishop Islaf, the father of bishop Gizor. Another son of Tait&apos;s was Cetil-beorn, the father of Col, the father of Thor-kell, the father of Col the Wick-were bishop.

<p>Many great men are come from Cetil-beorn.

<p n=14.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-fred the Old</hi> took in settlement East Tongue, between Cold-fork and White-river, and dwelt at Tongue. With him came out Drumb-Ord that dwelt at Drumb-Ord-stead.

<p n=14.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Os-gar</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Wolf. To him Cetil-beorn gave his daughter Thor-gerth in wedlock, and there came with her from home <hi>as a marriage-portion</hi> all Lithe-land above Hay-garth. <pb id=pb230a n=230>He dwelt at West Lithe. Their sons were Gar gode, and Thor-gar, the father of Bard of Moss-fell.

<p n=14.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Eilif the Wealthy</hi>, the son of Ean-wend Bill, took to wife Thor-cátla, daughter of Cetil-beorn, and there followed with her from home <hi>as marriage-portion</hi> Head-land. There they two dwelt. Their son was Thore, the father of Thor-aren Sealing.

<p n=15.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>We-thorm</hi>, the son of We-mund the Old, was a mighty <hi>herse</hi>. He fled away from king Harold east into Iamta-land, and cleared the wild forest <hi>or</hi> marks there, and settled them. Holm-fast <hi>or</hi> Amala-fast was the name of his son, and Grim was his sister&apos;s son. They were together on wicking cruises in the west, and there in the Southreys they slew earl As-beorn Skerry-blesa; and there they got, as war-booty, Alofa his wife, and Erne-heid his daughter, and Holm-fast gained her [Erne-heid] by lot, and sold her to his father to be a bond-maid. Grim took to wife Alofa, the daughter of Thord Wagg-agd, whom the earl had had to wife.

<p>Grim came to Iceland and took in settlement all Grim&apos;s-ness up to Swine-mere, and dwelt in Andorth-ness four winters, and afterwards at Bower-fell. His son was Thor-gils, that had to wife Asa, the daughter of Gest, Ordlaf&apos;s son. Their sons were these: Thor-arin of Bower-fell and Eor-wend of Mid-hanger.

<p n=15.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hall-kell</hi> [was] the brother of Cetil-beorn by the same mother. He came to Iceland and was with Cetil-beorn the first winter. Cetil-beorn promised to give him land, but he thought it a poor thing to take land of him, and challenged Grim to give up his land, or else to fight a <pb id=pb231a n=231>wager of battle. Grim went on the holm, i.e. <hi>fought the wager of battle</hi>, with Hall-kell below Hall-kell&apos;s-hillocks, and there he fell. But Hall-kell afterwards dwelt at Hillocks. His sons were these: Ot-kell, whom Gun-here, Ha-mund&apos;s son, slew, and Ord o&apos; Kid-rock, the father of Hall-beorn, that was slain over against Hall-beorn&apos;s cairns [II. <hi rend=bold>26.</hi> 3], and Hall-kell, the father of Hall-ward, the father of Thor-stan, whom Einar the Shetlander slew. The son of Hall-kell, Ord&apos;s son, was Bearnie, the father of Hall, the father of Orm.

<p>Now it is come as far as the settlement of Ing-wolf, and the men that shall now be told over were they that took up their abode in his settlement.

<p n=16.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-grim Bill</hi>, the brother of Ean-wend Bill, by the same mother, was the son of Wolf of Hill. He took in settlement all the land above Thwart-water and dwelt at Bill&apos;s-fell.

<p n=16.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Stan-red</hi> was the son of <hi rend=sc>Mel-patrec</hi> [Mael-Patruic], a man of birth in Ireland. He was a freedman of Thor-grim Bild. He had to wife a daughter of Thor-grim. He was the most handsome of men. He took in settlement all Mere-land, and dwelt at Stan-red-stead. His son was Thor-mod [Diarmaid], the father of Car, the father of Thor-mod [Diarmaid], the father of Brand, the father of Thore, the father of Brand of Thing-weald.

<p n=16.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Hrod-laf</hi>, the son of Einar, the son of Alwe Bairn-carle, came into Lear-voe when it was all inhabited along the sea. He took in settlement land marching with that of Stan-red, all outside of Ax-water <pb id=pb232a n=232>that runs through the Moot-field <hi>or</hi> Ting-wall, and dwelt at Heath-by some winters. Then he challenged Ey-wind of Heifer-voe <hi>or</hi> Quhae-voe to fight a wager of battle with him or sell him his land; but Ey-wind chose rather that they should deal over the land. Ey-wind dwelt some winters afterwards at Heath-by, and then went to By-skerries on Walrus-ness, but Hrod-laf afterwards dwelt at Heifer-voe, and he is <hi>howed</hi> there. His son was Swarting, the father of Grim of Moss-fell, the Law-speaker.

<p n=16.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Worm the Old</hi>, the son of earl Ey-wind, the son of earl Ern-mod, the son of earl Nered the Stingy: Worm took land in settlement between Warm-river and Thwart-water, all over Ing-wolf&apos;s-fell, and dwelt at Hwam. He had to wife Thor-wen, the daughter of Cetil Keel-farer, that smote to death the Fin-galcn [<hi>a monster of some kind</hi>]. She was the grandfather&apos;s sister of Grim the Halegoman. Their son was Worm the Old, the father of Darre, the father of Erne. Earl Ey-wind was with Ceotwa the Wealthy against king Harold at Hafr&apos;s-frith.

<p n=16.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Alf the Agdish</hi> [<hi>of Agd</hi>] fled before king Harold Fairhair from Agd in Norway. He came to Iceland, and put his ship into the mouth [of a river] that is called after him Alf&apos;s-mouth. He took in settlement all the land outside Warm-river, and dwelt at Peak.

<p n=16.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-grim</hi>, Grim-wolf&apos;s son, his brother&apos;s son, came out with him; and he it was that took all his heritage after him, for Alf was childless. Thor-grim&apos;s son was Ey-wind. the father of Thor-ord gode, the father of Skapte.

<p>Ozur was also a son of Ey-wind, and he had to wife Bera, the daughter of Egil, the son of Scald-Grim.

<pb id=pb233a n=233><p>The mother of Thor-grim was Corm-lod [Gorm-flaith], the daughter of Cearval [Cear-bhall], king of the Irish.

<p n=16.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thore Harvest-dark</hi> took in settlement Seal-voe and Crisu-wick, but Hegg his son dwelt at Voe; and Bead-mod, his other son, was the father of Thor-aren, the father of Stigand, the father of Thor-ward, the father of Thor-hild; the mother of Sig-rod, Thor-grim&apos;s son.

<p n=16.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Mould-Peak&apos;s sons took up their abode in Grind-wick, as it is written before [IV. 17].

<p n=16.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Stan-wen the Old</hi>, the kinswoman of Ing-wolf, came to Iceland and stayed with Ing-wolf the first winter. He offered to give her all Walrus-ness west of Hwass&apos;s-rawn; but she gave him an English cape of various colours, for she wished to call it a bargain and sale, for she thought there was less risk so of having the gift cancelled.

<p>Her-laug, the brother of Scald-Grim, had had Stan-wen to wife. Their sons were Nial and Arnor.

<p n=16.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ey-wind</hi> was the name of a kinsman and foster-son of Stan-wen. She gave him land between Heifer-voe-rock and Hwass&apos;s-rawn. His son was Erling [Egil], the father of Thor-aren, the father of Sigh-wat [Sig-mund], the father of Thor-orna, the mother of Thor-beorn, the son of Arn-theow of Crysa-wick, and of Alofu, the mother of Law-speaker Fin.

<p n=16.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Here-wolf</hi>, he that was told of before [II. <hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 7], was the kinsman of Ing-wolf and his sworn brother, wherefore Ing-wolf gave him land between Reek-ness and Voe. His son was Bard, the father of Here-wolf, that went to Greenland and came into the Sea-Walls [i.e. <pb id=pb234a n=234>the great earthquake waves]. On his ship was a Southrey man, that made the Sea-Wall-Pæan, whereof this is the beginning:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>Let us all hearken to the song.
</lg>

    <p rend="text-align(right)">[<hi>And the burden is.</hi>&mdash;See Bk. II. <hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 7.]


<p n=16.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Os-beorn</hi> was the name of a man, the son of Ozur, and the brother&apos;s son of Ing-wolf. He took land in settlement between Rawn&apos;s-holt-beck and Hwass&apos;s-rawn, all Elfet&apos;s-ness, and dwelt at Sculi-stead. His son was Egil, the father of Ozur, the father of Thor-arin, the father of Olaf, the father of Swegen-beorn, the father of Os-mund, the father of Swegen-beorn, the father of Styrcar....


<p><hi>Epilogue.</hi>

<p n=17.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>17.</hi> 1.</ab> Now are the settlements that have been in Iceland gone through. <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>According as historians have written it, first priest <hi rend=sc>Are the Historian</hi>, the son of Thor-gils, and <hi rend=sc>Col-skegg the Wise</hi>.

<p n=17.1.1>But this book I have written, Hawk Ellend&apos;s son, according to the book that Sir <hi rend=sc>Sturla</hi> the Lawman, the best of historians, wrote; and according to that second book, which <hi rend=sc>Styrme the Historian</hi> wrote. And I have kept that which either gave more than the other; but in the great bulk they were both agreed, and therefore it is no wonder if this <hi rend=sc>Book of Settlements</hi> be longer than any other.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>

<p n=17.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And these have been the best-born settlers.

<p>In the <hi rend=sc>South-countrymen&apos;s Quarter</hi>:&mdash;

<p>Raven the Fool, Cetil Salmon, Sigh-wat the Red, Ha-stan Atle&apos;s <pb id=pb235a n=235>son, Cetil-beorn the Old, Helge Beolan, Ing-wolf, Aurlyg the Old, Colgrim the Old, Beorn Gold-bearer, Ean-wend Broad-beard.

<p n=17.2.1>And in the <hi rend=sc>East-frith-men&apos;s Quarter</hi>:&mdash;

<p>Thor-stan the White, Bryne-wolf the Old, Grout-Atle, and Cetil Thidrand&apos;s son, Raven-kell the gode, Bead-were the White, Hrod-laug the son of earl Regin-wald, Ozur the son of Os-beorn Hey-ang Beorn&apos;s son, from whom the priests of Frey&apos;s kin <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Frey&apos;s gydlings</hi> are come, Cetil the Beguiler, Leid-wolf the Champion.

<p n=17.2.2>And in the <hi rend=sc>North-countrymen&apos;s Quarter</hi>:&mdash;

<p>Ead-wine Shackle, Inge-mund the Old, Ew-here, Sæ-mund, Eiric o&apos; God-dales, Thord o&apos; the Heads, Helge the Lean, Ey-wind Thor-stan&apos;s son, Hamund Hell-skin.

<p n=17.2.3>And in the <hi rend=sc>West-frith-men&apos;s Quarter</hi>:&mdash;

<p>Hros-kell, Scald-Grim, Seal-Thore, Beorn the Eastron, Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie, Ead the Deep o&apos; Wealth, Gar-mund Hell-skin, Wolf Squint, Thord Wickingsson.

<p n=17.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Men of knowledge <hi>or</hi> historians say that the country was wholly settled and taken up in sixty winters, so that it hath never after been settled any more. At that time there were many settlers and their sons yet alive.

<p n=17.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> These were the greatest chiefs in the country when the land had been dwelt in sixty winters.

<p n=17.4.1>In the South-countrymen&apos;s Quarter:&mdash;Fiddle-Mord, Eor-wend gode, Gar gode, Thor-stan Ing-wolf&apos;s son, Ord o&apos; Tongue.

<pb id=pb236a n=236><p n=17.4.2>And in the West-frith-men&apos;s Quarter:&mdash;Egil Scald-Grim&apos;s son, Thor-grim Ceallac&apos;s son, Thord Gelle.

<p n=17.4.3>And North:&mdash;Mid-frith Scegge, Thor-stan Ingi-mund&apos;s son, the men of God-dales, the sons of Sholto, Ey-wolf Wal-gerd&apos;s son, As-kell <hi>or</hi> Os-cetil gode.

<p n=17.4.4>And in the East-frith-men&apos;s Quarter:&mdash;Thor-stan the White, Raven-kell gode, Thor-stan the father of Hall o&apos; Side, Thord Frey&apos;s priest <hi>or</hi> gode.

<p n=17.4.5>Raven Salmon&apos;s son was then holding the Speakership of the Laws.

<p n=17.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Men say that these settlers were baptized:&mdash;Helge the Lean, Aur-lyg the Old, Helge Beolan, Eor-wend the Christian, Ead the Deep Wealthy, Cetil the Beguiler, and most of them that came hither from the west of the sea.

<p>Some held their Christendom well till their death-day, but it did not often go on in the family, because that of their sons, some reared temples and sacrificed, and the land was heathen nearly a hundred [120] winters.

<p>[<hi rend=sc>Here endeth the Book of Settlements.</hi>]



<!-- END OF BOOK OF SETTLEMENTS (TRANSLATION) -->


</div3>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">




<pb id=pb237 n=237>
<div1 n=2 id=s1.2>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 2.</ab> EARLY GENEALOGIES FROM SAGAS.</head>


<p>Besides the pedigrees found in Are&apos;s works, there is a body of genealogical matter of early date to be gathered from the Icelandic family Histories to which they were added, as we hold, by 13th or 12th-century editors.

<p>They are found under two conditions:&mdash;First, in the Lesser Sagas attached to the end, where they clearly are but an appendage; for whenever there are two families of MSS., only one has them, and the others not, e.g. Floamanna or Hrafn Sweinbeornsson&apos;s Saga, where there is an added pedigree in one vellum only. Nor are they in any case necessary to the tale to which they are attached; but, on the contrary, they rather spoil the artistic conclusion to which the epic narrative is brought by introducing a fresh and somewhat discordant interest.

<p>Secondly, they are found imbedded in the Greater Complex Sagas; here they are common to all the MSS., forming part of the material used by the compiler, or 13th-century editor; and he has accordingly, in welding the separate small Sagas together to make a new and consistent whole, found fit places for the insertion, bit by bit, of the pedigrees at his command.

<p>The bulk of the pedigrees given below are from Nial&apos;s Saga, which happens to be remarkably full in the S. and SE., E. and NE. of the island, but poor in the NW. and still more so in W.; hence in arranging them we have reversed Are&apos;s order and worked back to the place he starts from, going wither-shins, so that we begin where our material is best.

<p>These pedigrees, with those of Are, comprise all that survives of the strictly historical lore of the 10th or 11th centuries, just as Sturlunga Saga (Islend. Saga, ch. i), with the material printed at the end of the 2nd vol. of the Oxford Edition (ii. 497&ndash;502) and drawn from various sources, yields all that remains of the genealogical knowledge of the 12th and 13th centuries.

<p>We begin with the genealogies of Nial&apos;s Saga as the largest collection. For this Saga, like Sturlunga alone, is catholic in range. There is scarcely one great family in Iceland (save in the West) of which some member is not brought in, either in the course of the famous law cases or in the journeys of Flose, or the circuit of Skarphedin.

<p>The bulk of the genealogic matter is the same as that in Landnama-book, as was to be expected, but there are some important divergencies.

<p>Whence is this matter drawn? Here the Compiler of the Saga gives us no direct information, and, strangely enough, the only time he mentions an authority, Are, there is a manifest error in his statement. It is in § 36 where, speaking of the pedigree of Thor-wolf, Mostr-beardie, <pb id=pb238 n=238>he calls him the son of Erne-wolf Fish-driver, but adds that Are makes him the son of Thor-gils Reydar-sida. Now Are&apos;s version is well known from Landnama and Eyrbyggia, and he uniformly makes Thor-wolf the son of Erne-wolf, mentioning his pedigree more than once. This is the Western local tradition. The passage is therefore corrupt as it now stands in all copies of Nial&apos;s Saga, and must have originally run somewhat in this way: &lsquo;He was the son of Erne-wolf, as Are the historian says, but N. N. the historian says he was the son of Thor-gils Reydar-sida.&rsquo; The authority that differed from Are was most likely Sæmund the historian, a local authority to the Niala Editor. Sæmund must, in order to get his surname, have had to do with Icelandic historical matter, and very possibly it is from some genealogic compilation of his that the Nial&apos;s Saga Editor is writing in his pedigree. The error must go back to the archetype. There is a similar instance of a mistake running through all copies of Nial&apos;s Saga in the chapter about the origin of the Fifth Court, as we have there shown (see Bk. II. § 4).

<p>What in other instances is the weight of the Nial&apos;s Saga pedigrees as compared with Are&apos;s where they differ? In one case at least Are must somewhere be wrong (Ld. V). Throughout Nial&apos;s Saga Mord Gigia, his brothers (and sister) are made the children of Sighwat the Settler, of whom a special tale is told, and who undoubtedly existed. And this chimes in with the contemporary pedigrees, for Mord is associated with Settler&apos;s sons, the second generation, and it also agrees with the position and associations of Gunnar of Lithe-end, his sister&apos;s son. But Are puts in another step thus:&mdash;


<p><figure id=p0238 rend="image(images/p0238.png)">

<!--
Are==         Sighwat
                 |
              Sigmund
    _____________|________________________
   |         |        |         |         |
Rannweig    Mord    Sigfus    Lambe    Thorgerd,
   |                  |                m. Onund Bild
 Gunnar             Thrain



Nials S.==    Sighwat
    _____________|________________________
   |         |        |         |         |
Rannweig    Mord    Lambe    Sigfus    Thorgerd,
   |                            |      m. O. B.
 Gunnar                      Thrain
-->

</figure>


<p rend=noindent>bringing a Sigmund (who probably was Sighwat&apos;s brother) into the line, in such defiance of what is known of the living relations of Mord and Gunnar, that when writing Tima-tal (Safn 282&ndash;83) this discrepancy forced itself on the Editor and gave him great trouble, the evidence of contemporary parallel pedigrees being entirely on the side of the Nial&apos;s Saga.

<p>The text here given is founded on these MSS.:&mdash;


<table>
<row><cell>Cd.    <cell>= <cell>AM. 468.
<row><cell>B.     <cell>= <cell>AM. 132 (fol.); begins in ch. 25.
<row><cell>G.     <cell>= <cell>Graskinna (Cd. Reg.), in charter hand.
<row><cell>K.     <cell>= <cell>Kalfal&oelig;k-bóc, AM. 133 (fol.).
<row><cell>fragm. <cell>= <cell>AM. 162, biggish fragment [used for the Fifth Court chapter later], faulty in pedigrees.
</table>


<pb id=pb239 n=239><p>None of the MSS., taken singly, gives the pedigrees in anything like a fair condition; none can in point of accuracy compare with the Landnama vellums. Names or sets of names are skipped and misread, now in this, now in that vellum, in a manner somewhat bewildering; yet, taken all together, they yield a fair text. Hence the fault lies, not with the original scribe or even with the Niala editor, but with the scribes of our texts, to whom the genealogies were mere tinkling sound and ornament.

<p>The pedigrees in Ld. begin at the beginning and go downward; but the Niala genealogist starts with his hero and counts backwards as far as he can. Thus Ld. runs usually f. N.N.; f. N.N.; f. N.N.; but Niala runs N.N. s.; N.N. s.; N.N. s. It is this peculiarity of his which has made the long roll of running genitives ending with the familiar &lsquo;the son of Cetil Flat-neb, the son of Biorn Buna, the son of Grim lord of Sogn&rsquo;&mdash;the names of the three patriarchs of the Settlement closing the tale.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 lang=is n=A>
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>A.</ab> <hi rend=sc>From Niala.</hi></head>


<div3 lang=is type=Section>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>The South Quarter</hi> [cp. Ld. Bk. V].</head>

<p><anchor id=a239.1>1. [Ch. 25.] <hi rend=sc>Valgarðr</hi> hét maðr; hann bió at Hofe við <anchor id=a239.2>Rang-&aoacute;; hann vas sonr Iorundar Goða, <anchor id=a239.3><hi rend=sc>Hrafns</hi> sonar<note place=apparatus id=an239.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> G; Rannvis s., Cd.</note> [ens] <hi rend=sc>Heimska</hi>, Valgarz sonar, Ævars sonar, Vémundar <anchor id=a239.4>sonar Orðlu-kars, Þórolfs sonar Vaganefs, Þróndar sonar ens Gamla, <anchor id=a239.5>Harallz sonar Hilldi-tannar, Hr&oeacute;reks sonar Sl&oelig;ngan-bauga, Halfdanar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a239.6>sonar, Fróða sonar, Hr&oeacute;reks sonar<note place=apparatus id=an239.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Halfd. ... Hr&oeacute;r. s.]</ab> add. G.</note>. Móðer Harallz Hildi-tannar <anchor id=a239.7>vas Auðr, dótter Ívars Víð-faðma, Halfdanar sonar ens <anchor id=a239.8>Snialla. Bróðer Valgarz ens Grá vas Ulfr Avrgoðe, es<note place=apparatus id=an239.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Avrgoðe, es]</ab> Sturlungar ero frá k. ok Oddaverjar, G.</note> Odda&shy;verjar <anchor id=a239.9>ero frá komner. Ulfr &aolig;rgoðe vas faðer Svartz, f&aolig;ðor Loðmundar, <anchor id=a239.10>f&aolig;ðor Sigfúss, f&aolig;ðor Sæmundar (ens) Fróða.<note place=apparatus id=an239.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Fróða]</ab> f. Loptz, f. Sæmundar í Odda, add. AM. 464. Loðmundr Svartz s. var f. Gríms, f. Svertings, f. Vígdísar, m. Sturlo í Hvammi, add. G.</note>&mdash;En frá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a239.11>Valgarðe es komenn Kolbeinn Unge. Þeir br&oeacute;ðr Ulfr Orgoðe <anchor id=a239.12>ok Valgarðr enn Gráe fóru at biðja Unnar, ok giptez hon Valgarðe <anchor id=a239.13>án ráðe allra frænda sínna. [V. <hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.]

<p><anchor id=a239.14>2. [Ch. 52.] Rúnolfr hét maðr, son <hi rend=sc>Ulfs &aolig;rgoða</hi>; hann bió í <anchor id=a239.15>Dale fyr austan Markar-fliót. [V. <hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 2.]<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a239.16>3. [Ch. 1.] M&aolig;rðr hét maðr, es kallaðr vas Gígja; hann vas <anchor id=a239.17>sonr <hi rend=sc>Sigvaz</hi> ens <hi rend=sc>Rauða</hi>; hann bió á Velle á Rang-ár-v&aolig;llom; <anchor id=a239.18>hann vas ríkr h&aolig;fðinge ok mála-fylgjo-maðr mikill, ok svá mikill <anchor id=a239.19>laga-maðr, at &oelig;nger þótto l&aolig;gleger dómar nema hann vere í. <anchor id=a239.20>Hann átte dóttor eina, es Unnr hét. [V. <hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.]<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p><anchor id=a239.21>4. [Ch. 57.] Starkaðr hét maðr; hann vas sonr Barkar Blá&shy;tannar-skeggs, <anchor id=a239.22>Þórkels sonar Bundin-fóta, es land nam um-hverfis <anchor id=a239.23>Þríhyrning: hann vas kvángaðr maðr, ok hét kona hans Hallbera; <anchor id=a240.1><pb id=pb240 n=240>hon vas dótter Hróallz ens Rauða, ok Hilldi-gunnar, dóttor Þórsteins <anchor id=a240.2>Titlings. Móðer Hilldi-gunnar vas Auðr, dótter Eyvindar <anchor id=a240.3>Karpa, syster Modolfs ens Spaka frá Mosfelle, es Modylfingar &apos;ro <anchor id=a240.4>frá komner. Syner þeirra Starkaðar ok Hallbero vóro þeir Þórgeirr, <anchor id=a240.5>ok Borkr, ok Þórkell: Hildi-gunnr lækner var syster þeirra.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p><anchor id=a240.6>5. [Ch. 19.] Gunnarr hét maðr; hann var frænde Unnar; Rann&shy;veig <anchor id=a240.7>hét móðer hans, ok vas Sigfúss dótter, Sigvaz sonar ens <anchor id=a240.8>Rauða.&mdash;Hann vas vegenn við Sandhóla-ferjo. Faðer Gunnars <anchor id=a240.9>hét Hámundr, ok vas sonr Gunnars <hi rend=sc>Baugs</hi> sonar.&mdash;Við þann es <anchor id=a240.10>kennt Gunnars-holt. Móðer Hámundar hét Hrafnhilldr; hon vas<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a240.11>Stórolfs dótter, Heings<note place=apparatus id=an240.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Heings, thus Cd.</note> sonar. Stórolfr vas bróðer Hrafns l&aolig;g&shy;s&aolig;go-mannz. <anchor id=a240.12>Sonr Stórolfs vas Ormr enn Sterke. Gunnarr Hámundar <anchor id=a240.13>son bió at Hlíðar-enda í Fliótz-hlíð; bróðer hans hét <anchor id=a240.14>Colskeggr: Annarr bróðer hans hét Hi&aolig;rtr; hann vas þá í <anchor id=a240.15>bernsko: Ormr Skógar-nef vas bróðer Gunnars laun-getenn:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a240.16>Arnguðr hét syster Gunnars; hána átte Hróarr Tungo-goðe, son <anchor id=a240.17>Una ens Óborna, Garðars sonar&mdash;Sá fann Ísland. Son Arngunnar <anchor id=a240.18>vas Hrómundr Halte, es bió á Hámundar-st&aolig;ðom. [V. <hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 2.]

<p><anchor id=a240.19>6. [Ch. 35.] Þráinn hét maðr; hann vas Sigfús son, <hi rend=sc>Sigvaz</hi> <anchor id=a240.20><hi rend=sc>SONAR</hi> ens <hi rend=sc>Rauða</hi>; hann bió at Griót-&aoacute; í Flióz-hlíð; hann vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a240.21>frænde Gunnars ok virðinga-maðr mikill; hann átte Þórhilde <anchor id=a240.22>Skáld-kono; hon vas orð-gífr mikit ok fór með flimtan.

<p><anchor id=a240.23>7. [Ch. 41.] Sigmundr hét maðr: hann vas Lamba son, Sigvaz <anchor id=a240.24>sonar ens Rauða. [V. <hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 2.]

<p><anchor id=a240.25>8. [Ch. 20.] Niáll hét maðr; hann vas sonr Þórgeirs Gollnis<note place=apparatus id=an240.2><ab type=lineNumRef>25.</ab> K; Gollings, Cd.; Golldins, G.</note>,<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a240.26>Þórolfs-sonar; móðer Niáls hét <hi rend=sc>Ásgerðr</hi><note place=apparatus id=an240.3><ab type=lineNumRef>26.</ab> Ars, Cd.; asks, G.</note>, ok vas dótter Ása hersiss <anchor id=a240.27>ens Omálga: hon hafðe komet út hingat til Íslannz, ok numet <anchor id=a240.28>land fyr vestan Markar-fliót, miðle Ioldu-steins<note place=apparatus id=an240.4><ab type=lineNumRef>28.</ab> Oldusteins, Cd.</note> ok Selja-lannz-múla. <anchor id=a240.29>Sonr henar vas Hollta-Þórer, faðer þeirra Þórleifs Kraaks <anchor id=a240.30>es Skógverjar ero frá komner, ok Þórgríms ens Mikla, ok Skorar-Geirs.<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a240.31>Niáll bió at Bergþórs-hvále í Landeyjom. Bergþóra hét <anchor id=a240.32>kona hans; hon vas Skarpheðins dótter; þau &aoacute;tto sex b&aolig;rn, d&oeacute;tr <anchor id=a240.33>þriár ok sono þriá. [V. <hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 4.]

<p><anchor id=a240.34>9. [Ch. 39.] Þórðr hét maðr ok vas kallaðr Leysingja son; <anchor id=a240.35>Sigtryggr hét faðer hans, ok hafðe hann verit leysinge Ásgerðar,<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a240.36>móðor Nials ok Hollta-Þóris; hann druc knaðe í Markar-flióte.

<p><anchor id=a240.37>10. [Ch. 117.] Ingialldr bió at Keldom, bróðer Hróðnyjar, <anchor id=a240.38>móðor H&aolig;scollz Nials sonar. Þau vóro b&aolig;rn H&aolig;scollz<note place=apparatus id=an240.5><ab type=lineNumRef>38.</ab> <ab type=textRef>H&aolig;scollz]</ab> H&prime;, Cd.</note> ens Hvíta, <anchor id=a240.39>Ingiallz sonar ens Sterka, Gerfinz sonar ens Rauða, Solva sonar, <anchor id=a240.40>Gunnsteins sonar Berserkja-bana; Ingialldr átte Þraslaugo, dóttor<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a240.41>Egils, Þórðar sonar Freys-goða. Móðer Egils vas Þraslaug, dótter <anchor id=a240.42>Þórsteins Titlings: móðer Þraslaugar vas Unnr, dótter Eyvindar <anchor id=a240.43>Karpa syster Modolfs ens Spaka<note place=apparatus id=an240.6><ab type=lineNumRef>43.</ab> <ab type=textRef>s. M. ens Sp.]</ab> add. G.</note>. [Cp. V. <hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 7.]

<pb id=pb241 n=241><p><anchor id=a241.1>11. [Ch. 149.] Á mið-b&oeacute;nom bió sá maðr es Bi&aolig;rn hét; hann <anchor id=a241.2>var kallaðr Bi&aolig;rn enn Hvíte; hann vas Caðals son, Bialfa<note place=apparatus id=an241.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Bialfa]</ab> Bialka, G.</note> sonar. <anchor id=a241.3>Bialfe hafðe veret leysinge Ásgerðar, móðor Niáls ok Hollta-Þóris. <anchor id=a241.4>Bi&aolig;rn átte þá kono es Valgerðr hét; hon var Þórbranz<note place=apparatus id=an241.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórbranz]</ab> Þrondar, G.</note> dótter, <anchor id=a241.5>Ásbranz sonar. Móðer hennar hét Goðlaug; hon var syster<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a241.6>Hámundar, f&aolig;ðor Gunnars frá Hlíðar-enda. Hon vas gefen til <anchor id=a241.7>fiár Birni.

<p><anchor id=a241.8>12. [Ch. 58.] Egill hét maðr; hann vas Kols sonr, Óttars sonar <anchor id=a241.9>Ballar, es land nam meðal Stota-l&oeacute;kjar ok Reyðar-vaz<note place=apparatus id=an241.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Reyðar-vaz múla, fragm.</note>. Bróðer <anchor id=a241.10>Egils vas Onundr í Trolla-skóge, faðer Halla ens Sterka, es vas at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a241.11>víge Hollta-Þóris með sonom Ketils ens Slétt-mála. Egill bió í <anchor id=a241.12>Sand-gile; syner hans vóro þeir Colr, ok Óttarr, ok Haukr; móðer <anchor id=a241.13>þeirra hét Steinv&aolig;r, syster Starkaðar. [V. <hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 7.]

<p><anchor id=a241.14>13. [Ch. 26.] Ásgrímr hét maðr; hann vas Elliða-Gríms son, <anchor id=a241.15>Ásgríms sonar, Avndotz sonar Kr&aoacute;ko. Móðer hans hét Iórunn,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a241.16>ok vas Teitz dótter, Ketilbiarnar sonar ens Gamla frá Mosfelle. <anchor id=a241.17>Móðer Teitz vas Helga, dótter Þórðar Skeggja, Hraps sonar, Biarnar <anchor id=a241.18>sonar Bunu, Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne. Móðer Iórunnar vas <anchor id=a241.19>Ólof Árbót, (dótter) B&aolig;ðvars hersess, Víkinga-Kára sonar. Bróðer <anchor id=a241.20>Ásgríms Elliða-Gríms sonar hét Sigfús; hans dótter vas Þórgerðr,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a241.21>móðer Sigfúss, f&aolig;ðor Sæmundar ens Fróða. Ásgrímr átte tvá <anchor id=a241.22>sono, ok hét hvárr-tvegge Þórhallr. Grímr hét ok sonr Ásgríms, <anchor id=a241.23>en Þórhalla dótter. [III. <hi rend=bold>13, 15</hi>.]

<p><anchor id=a241.24>14. [Ch. 46.] Gizorr hét maðr; hann vas Teitz son, Ketilbiarnar <anchor id=a241.25>sonar ens Gamla frá Mosfelle: móðer hans hét Álof; hon var<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a241.26>dótter B&aolig;ðvars hersess, Víkinga-Kára sonar. Hans sonr vas Ísleifr <anchor id=a241.27>byscop: móðer Teitz hét Helga, ok vas dótter Þórðar Skeggja, <anchor id=a241.28>Hraps sonar, Biarnar sonar Bunu, Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne<note place=apparatus id=an241.4><ab type=lineNumRef>28.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gríms s. ... Sogne]</ab> add. K.</note>. <anchor id=a241.29>Gizorr Hvíte bió at Mosfelle ok vas h&aolig;fðinge mikill. [V. <hi rend=bold>14.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a241.30>Sá maðr es nefndr til s&aolig;gonnar es Geirr Goðe hét, Ásgeirs<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a241.31>son, Ulfs sonar<note place=apparatus id=an241.5><ab type=lineNumRef>30.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ásg. s., Ulfs s.]</ab> add. G.</note>; móðer hans<note place=apparatus id=an241.6><ab type=lineNumRef>31.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hans]</ab> Geirs, G.</note> hét Þórkatla, dótter Ketilbiarnar Gamla <anchor id=a241.32>frá Mosfelle. Geirr bió í Hlíð í Byscops-tungo<note place=apparatus id=an241.7><ab type=lineNumRef>32.</ab> <ab type=textRef>í Byscops-t.]</ab> add. G.</note>.

<p><anchor id=a241.33>15. [Ch. 47.] Otkell hét maðr; hann vas Skarfs son, Hallkels <anchor id=a241.34>sonar&mdash;Sá barðez við Grím í Gríms-nese, ok fellde hann á holme. <anchor id=a241.35>Þeir vóro br&oeacute;ðr, Hallkell ok Ketilbi&aolig;rn Gamle. Hann bió í<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a241.36>Kirkjo-b&oeacute;. Þórgerðr hét kona hans; hon vas Más dótter, Runolfs <anchor id=a241.37>sonar, Naddaðar sonar ens Færeyska. [V. <hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 2.]

<p><anchor id=a241.38>16. [Ch. 56.] Skafte hét maðr; hann vas Þóroddz sonr: móðer <anchor id=a241.39>Þóroddz vas Þórv&aolig;r; hon vas dótter <hi rend=sc>Þórmoðar</hi> Scafta, Óleifs sonar <anchor id=a241.40>Breiðs, Einars sonar<note place=apparatus id=an241.8><ab type=lineNumRef>40.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Einars s.]</ab> Add. G.</note>, Olvés sonar Barna-karls. [V. <hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 2.]<ab type=lineNum>40</ab>

<p><anchor id=a241.41>17. [Ch. 126.] At Reykjom á Skeiðom bió Rúnolfr, Þórsteins <anchor id=a241.42>son. Hildi-glúmr hét son hans.

<pb id=pb242 n=242><p><anchor id=a242.1>18. [Ch. 13.] Br&oeacute;ðr þrír ero nefnder til s&aolig;gonnar; hét einn <anchor id=a242.2>Þórarenn, annarr Rage, þriðe Glúmr: þeir vóro syner Óleifs <anchor id=a242.3>Hiallta<note place=apparatus id=an242.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Olafs halta, Cd.</note>, ok vóro virðinga-menn mikler, ok vel auðger at fé. Þórarenn <anchor id=a242.4>átte þat kenningar-nafn, at hann vas kallaðr Raga-bróðer, <anchor id=a242.5>hann hafðe l&aolig;gs&aolig;go efter Hrafn Hæings<note place=apparatus id=an242.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Heings, Cd. Ld. I. 9. 4 makes no mention of Glum.</note> son; hann var stór-vitr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a242.6>maðr ok bió at Varma-l&oeacute;k. [I. <hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 4.]


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>The East Quarter</hi> [cp. Ld. Bk. IV].</head>

<p><anchor id=a242.7>19. [Ch. 97.] Hallr hét maðr er kallaðr vas Síðo-Hallr; hann <anchor id=a242.8>vas Þórsteins son, <hi rend=sc>B&aolig;ðvars</hi> sonar. Móðer Hallz hét Þórdís, ok vas <anchor id=a242.9>Ozorar dótter, Hroðlaugs sonar, R&aolig;g<hi>n</hi>vallz sonar iarls  af M&oeacute;re, <anchor id=a242.10>Eysteins sonar Glumro: Hallr átte Ióreiðe, Þiðranda dóttor ens<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a242.11>spaka, Ketils sonar Þryms, Þóris sonar Þiðranda<note place=apparatus id=an242.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ens spaka ... Þiðranda]</ab> add. G, 132; om. Cd.</note> or Veradale; bróðer <anchor id=a242.12>Ióreiðar<note place=apparatus id=an242.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ióreiðar]</ab> G, 132; Þiðranda, Cd.</note> vas Ketell Þrymr í Niarð-vík, ok Þórvalldr, faðer Helga <anchor id=a242.13>Droplaugar sonar. Hallkatla vas syster Ióreiðar, móðer Þórkels <anchor id=a242.14>Geitis sonar ok Þiðranda. Þórsteinn hét bróðer Hallz ok vas <anchor id=a242.15>kallaðr Breið-mage; hans sonr vas Colr, es Cáre vegr í Bretlande.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a242.16>Syner Hallz á Síðo vóro þeir Þórsteinn, ok Egill, Þórvarðr<note place=apparatus id=an242.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórvarðr]</ab> 132; Þorvalldr, Cd.</note>, ok Liótr, <anchor id=a242.17>ok Þiðrande&mdash;þann es sagt es at díser væge. [IV. <hi rend=bold>12.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a242.18>20. Þórer hét maðr ok vas kallaðr Hollta-Þórer; hans syner <anchor id=a242.19>vóro þeir Þórgeirr Skorar-Geirr, ok Þórleifr Krákr, es Skógverjar <anchor id=a242.20>ero frá komner, ok Þórgrímr enn Mikle<note place=apparatus id=an242.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Krákr, es Sk.... Mikle]</ab> 132; Krakr ok Þorgrímr, Cd.</note>. [V. <hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 3.]<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p><anchor id=a242.21>21. [Ch. 116.] Flose sende orð Col Þórsteins syne, ok Glúme <anchor id=a242.22>syne Hildiss ens Gamla, Geirleifs sonar, Onundar sonar Tosco-baks. <anchor id=a242.23>[V. <hi rend=bold>18.</hi> 2.]

<p><anchor id=a242.24>22. Þaðan reið hann til H&aolig;fða-brecko: þar bió Þórgrímr <anchor id=a242.25>Skraute, sonr Þórkels ens Fagra.<ab type=lineNum>25</ab>

<p><anchor id=a242.26>23. [Ch. 102.] Þaðan fóro þeir vestr til Skóga-hverfiss, ok gisto í <anchor id=a242.27>Kirkjob&oeacute;; þar bió Svartr. Ásbiarnar son, Þórsteins sonar, Ketils sonar <anchor id=a242.28>ens Fíflska&mdash;þeir h&aolig;fðo aller veret Cristner lang-feðgar. [IV. <hi rend=bold>16.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a242.29>24. [Ch. 103.] Þaðan fóro þeir til Dyr-hóla<note place=apparatus id=an242.7><ab type=lineNumRef>29.</ab> -holma, Cd.</note>, ok &aoacute;tto þar fund ok <anchor id=a242.30>buðo þar trú; ok cristnaðez þar Ingialldr, son Þórkels    <ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a242.31>Háeyiar-tyrðils<note place=apparatus id=an242.8><ab type=lineNumRef>30.</ab> Haeyrar, Cd,</note>.

<p><anchor id=a242.32>25. [Ch. 96.] Maðr es nefnðr Flose; hann vas sonr Þórðar <anchor id=a242.33>Freys-goða, Avzorar sonar, <hi rend=sc>Ásbiarnar</hi> sonar, Eyjangrs-Biarnar sonar, <anchor id=a242.34>Helga sonar, Biarnar sonar Bunu, Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne<note place=apparatus id=an242.9><ab type=lineNumRef>34.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gríms s.... Sogne]</ab> add. G.</note>. <anchor id=a242.35>Móðer Flosa vas Ingunn, dótter Þóress á Espe-hóle, Hámundar<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a242.36>sonar Heljar-skinnz, Hiors sonar, Hálfs sonar þess es réð fyr <anchor id=a242.37>Hálfs-reckom, Hiorleifs sonar ens Kven-sama. Móðer Þóress vas <anchor id=a242.38>Ingunn, dótter Helga (ens) Magra, es nam Eyjafi&aolig;rð. Flose átte <anchor id=a242.39>Steinv&aolig;ro, dóttor Hallz á Síðo; hon vas laun-geten ok hét Sólvor <anchor id=a242.40>móðer hennar, dótter Herjolfs Hvíta. Flose bió at Svína-felle, ok<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <pb id=pb243 n=243>vas h&aolig;fðinge mikill.... Bróðer hans hét Starkaðr, hann vas eigi<note place=apparatus id=an243.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eigi]</ab> add. fragm., om. Cd.</note> <anchor id=a243.1>sam-m&oeacute;ðr<note place=apparatus id=an243.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> sam-feðri, G, 132.</note> við Flosa. Móðer Starkaðar vas Þraslaug, dótter Þór&shy;steins <anchor id=a243.2>Titlings<note place=apparatus id=an243.3><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> tilings, Cd.</note>, Geirleifs sonar; en móðer Þraslaugar vas Uðr; <anchor id=a243.3>hon vas dótter Eyvindar Karfa<note place=apparatus id=an243.4><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Karfa]</ab> 132; Skarpa, Cd.</note> landnáma-mannz, ok syster Modolfs <anchor id=a243.5>ens Spaka. Br&oeacute;ðr Flosa vóro þeir Þórgeirr ok Steinn, Kolbeinn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a243.6>ok Egill. Hildiguðr hét dótter Starkaðar bróðor Flosa. [IV. <hi rend=bold>15.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a243.7>26. [Ch. 135.] Þaðan fóro þeir á Valþiófs-staðe: þar bió Sorle <anchor id=a243.8>Brodd-Helga son, bróðer Biarna<note place=apparatus id=an243.5><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> 132; Sorle broðer &hstrok;s s. broðer, Cd.</note>; hann átte Þórdíse dóttor Goðmundar <anchor id=a243.9>ens Ríka á M&aolig;ðro-v&aolig;llom.

<p><anchor id=a243.10>27. Þar [í Niarðvík] bioggo br&oeacute;ðr tveir, Þórkell Full-spakr ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a243.11>Þórvalldr bróðer hans: þeir vóro syner <hi rend=sc>Ketils</hi>, Þiðranda sonar ens <anchor id=a243.12>Spaka, Ketils sonar Þryms, Þóriss sonar Þiðranda. Móðer þeirra <anchor id=a243.13>Þórkels Full-spaks ok Þórvallz vas Yngvilldr, Þórkels dótter Full-spaks. <anchor id=a243.14>[IV. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a243.15>28. (Flose ...) fór þaðan til Vápnafiarðar, ok kom til Hofs:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a243.16>þar bió Biarne Brodd-Helga son, Þórgils sonar, <hi rend=sc>Þorsteins</hi> sonar <anchor id=a243.17>ens Hvíta, Aulvés sonar, Ásvallz<note place=apparatus id=an243.6><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Ayvallz s., Cd.; miswritten throughout all MSS., but in various ways&mdash;eyvallz, K; aulvallz, 132.</note> sonar, &OElig;xna-Þóris sonar. Móðer <anchor id=a243.18>Biarna vas Halla Lýtings dótter: móðer Brodd-Helga vas Ásvor, <anchor id=a243.19>dótter Þóriss, Graut-Atla sonar, Þóriss sonar Þiðranda. Biarne <anchor id=a243.20>Brodd-Helga son átte Rannveigo, Þórgeirs dóttor, Eiriks sonar or<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a243.21>Goðd&aolig;lom, Geirmundar sonar, Hróallz sonar, Eiriks sonar Orðig-skeggja. <anchor id=a243.22>[IV. <hi rend=bold>3.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a243.23>29. Þaðan fóro þeir austr til Breiðdals í Heydala: þar bió Hallbi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a243.24>enn sterke; hann átte Oddnýjo systor Sorla Brodd-Helga sonar.

<p><anchor id=a243.25>30. Þaðan ... á Hrafnkels-staðe: þar bió Hrafnkell, Þóriss son,<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a243.26>Hrafnkels sonar Raums. [IV. <hi rend=bold>6.</hi>]


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>The North Quarter</hi> [cp. Ld. Bk. III].</head>

<p><anchor id=a243.27>31. [Ch. 100.] Þórgeirr hét maðr es bió at Liósa-vatne; hann (vas) <anchor id=a243.28>Tiorva sonr, Þórkels sonar Langs. Móðer hans hét Þórunn ok vas <anchor id=a243.29>Þórsteins dótter, Sigmundar sonar, Gnúpa-Bárðar sonar. Guðríðr <anchor id=a243.30>hét kona hans; hon vas dótter Þórkels ens Svarta yr Hleiðrargarðe:<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a243.31>hans bróðer vas Ormr Tosku-bak, faðer Hlenna ens Gamla <anchor id=a243.32>yr Saurb&oeacute;. Þeir Ketill ok Þórkell vóro syner <hi rend=sc>Þóris Snepils</hi>, Ketils <anchor id=a243.33>sonar Brimils, Ornolfs sonar, Biornolfs sonar, Gríms sonar Loðinkinna<note place=apparatus id=an243.7><ab type=lineNumRef>33.</ab> loðing, Cd.</note>, <anchor id=a243.34>Ketils sonar H&ecedil;ings<note place=apparatus id=an243.8><ab type=lineNumRef>34.</ab> hæings, G.</note>, Hallbiarnar sonar half-trollz or Hrafn&shy;isto. <anchor id=a243.35>[IV. <hi rend=bold>16.</hi>]<ab type=lineNum>35</ab>

<p><anchor id=a243.36>32. [Ch. 114.] Maðr es nefndr Goðmundr enn Ríke, es bió á <anchor id=a243.37>M&aolig;ðro-v&aolig;llom í Eyjafirðe: hann vas Eyjolfs son, Einars sonar, <anchor id=a243.38>Auðunnar sonar Rotins, Þórolfs sonar Smiors, Þórsteins sonar <anchor id=a243.39>Skrofa, Grímr sonar Cambans: móðer Goðmundar hét Hallbera, <anchor id=a243.40>dótter Þóroz Hialms; en móðer Hallbero hét Regin-leif, dótter<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a243.41>Sæmundar ens Suðreyska&mdash;Við þann es kennd Sæmundar-hlíð í <anchor id=a243.42>Skaga-firðe. Móðer Eyjolfs, f&aolig;ðor Goðmundar, vas Valgerðr <anchor id=a244.1><pb id=pb244 n=244>Rúnolfs dótter: móðer Valgerðar vas Valbiorg; hennar móðer vas <anchor id=a244.2>Iórunn en Óborna, dótter Ósvallz konungs ens Helga: móðer <anchor id=a244.3>Iórunnar vas Bera<note place=apparatus id=an244.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3</ab> <ab type=textRef>Bera]</ab> G; Horn, 132, 466.</note>, dótter Iátmundar konungs ens Helga<note place=apparatus id=an244.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2</ab> <ab type=textRef>móðer Iór ... Helga]</ab> add. 132, G, K.</note>: móðer <anchor id=a244.4>Einars<note place=apparatus id=an244.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4</ab> <ab type=textRef>Einars, f.]</ab> 132; om. Cd.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Eyjolfs, vas Helga, dótter Helga ens Magra, es nam <anchor id=a244.5>Eyjafi&aolig;rð; hann vas sonr Eyvindar Austmannz ok Rafortu, dóttor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a244.6>Cearvals Íra konungs. Móðer Helgo, dóttor Helga, vas Þórunn <anchor id=a244.7>Hyrna, dótter Ketils Flatnefs, Biarnar sonar Bunu, Gríms sonar <anchor id=a244.8>hersiss: móðer Gríms vas Herv&aolig;r; en móðer Hervarar vas Þórgerðr, <anchor id=a244.9>dótter Háleygs<note place=apparatus id=an244.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hál.]</ab> Helga (H&oelig;lga), G.</note> konungs af Háloga-lande. Þórlaug hét <anchor id=a244.10>kona Góðmundar ens Ríka, dótter Atla ens Ramma, Eilífs sonar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a244.11>Arnar, Bárðar sonar í Ál, Ketils sonar Refs, Skíða sonar ens <anchor id=a244.12>Gamla. Herdís hét móðer Þórlaugar, dótter Þórðar at<note place=apparatus id=an244.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> add. 132.</note> H&aolig;fða, <anchor id=a244.13>Biarnar sonar Byrðu-smiors, Hróallz sonar, Hroðlaugs sonar <anchor id=a244.14>Hryks, Biarnar sonar Iarn-síðu, Ragnars sonar Loðbrókar, Si&shy;gurðar <anchor id=a244.15>sonar Hrings, Rannvés sonar, Raðbarz sonar. Móðer<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a244.16>Herdísar Þórðar<note place=apparatus id=an244.6><ab type=lineNumRef>16</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórðar]</ab> Skíða, Cd. Þórgerðr ... vas] om. Cd.</note> dóttor vas Þórgerðr Skíða d.; hennar móðer vas <anchor id=a244.17>Friðgerðr, dótter Cearvals Íra konungs, Goðmundr var h&aolig;fðinge <anchor id=a244.18>mikill ... ok es frá hónum komet allt et mesta mann-val á landeno, <anchor id=a244.19>Odda-verjar, ok Sturlungar ok Hvamm-verjar, ok Flióta-menn<note place=apparatus id=an244.7><ab type=lineNumRef>19</ab> Fliótverjar, K; Stur&shy;lungar ok Þórvarðr Þórarens son ok ..., 132.</note>, ok <anchor id=a244.20>Ketill byscop, ok marger ener mesto menn. [IV. <hi rend=bold>11&ndash;14</hi>, <hi rend=bold>6</hi>, <hi rend=bold>7</hi>, etc.]<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p><anchor id=a244.21>33. [Ch. 120.] Þaðan fóro þeir til búðar Skagfirðinga: þá búð <anchor id=a244.22>átte Hafr enn Auðge: hann vas sonr Þórkels, Eiriks sonar yr <anchor id=a244.23>Goðd&aolig;lom, Geirmundar sonar, Hróallz sonar, Eiriks sonar &aolig;rðum-skeggja<note place=apparatus id=an244.8><ab type=lineNumRef>23</ab> Orðig-skeggja, G, K.</note>, <anchor id=a244.24>es fellde Griótgarð (iarl) í Soknar-dale í Norege: móðer <anchor id=a244.25>Hafrs hét Þórunn, ok vas dótter Ásbiarnar Myrkár-skalla, Hross-biarnar<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a244.26>sonar. [IV. <hi rend=bold>8.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a244.27>34. Þá búð hafðe tialdat Þórkell Hákr: hann vas sonr Þórgeirs <anchor id=a244.28>Goða, Tiorva sonar, Þórkels sonar Langs: en móðer Þórgeirs vas <anchor id=a244.29>Þórunn, Þórsteins dótter, Sigmundar sonar, Gnúpa-Bárðar sonar; <anchor id=a244.30>Móðer Þórkels Háks hét Goðríðr; hon vas dótter Þórkels ens<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a244.31>Svarta or Hleiðrar-garðe, Þóris sonar Snepils, Ketils sonar Brimils<note place=apparatus id=an244.9><ab type=lineNumRef>31</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ketils s. Br.]</ab> G, 132; Brimils sonar, Cd.</note>, <anchor id=a244.32>Ornólfs sonar, Biornólfs sonar, Gríms sonar Loðin-kinna, Ketils <anchor id=a244.33>sonar Hæings, Hallbiarnar sonar Half-trollz. [IV. <hi rend=bold>16.</hi>]


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>The West Quarter</hi> [cp. Ld. Bk. II].</head>

<p><anchor id=a244.34>35. [Ch. 1.] Nú víkr s&aolig;gonne vestr til Breiða-fiarðar-dala: <anchor id=a244.35>maðr es nefndr H&aolig;scollr; hann vas Dala-Collz son: móðer hans<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a244.36>hét Þórgerðr, ok vas dótter Þórsteins ens Rauða, Óleifs<note place=apparatus id=an244.10><ab type=lineNumRef>36</ab> Olafs, Cd.</note> sonar ens <anchor id=a244.37>Hvíta, Ingiallz sonar, Helga sonar. Móðer Ingiallz vas Þóra, <anchor id=a244.38>dótter Sigurðar Orms-í-auga, Ragnars sonar Loðbrócar: Uðr en <anchor id=a244.39>Diúpvðga vas móðer Þórsteins Rauðs, dótter Ketils Flatnefs, <anchor id=a244.40>Biarnar sonar Bunu, Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne. H&aolig;scullr<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a244.41>bió á H&aolig;sculldz-st&aolig;ðum í Laxár-dale: Hrútr hét bróðer hans; <anchor id=a245.1><pb id=pb245 n=245>hann bió á Hrútz-st&aolig;ðom; hann vas sam-m&oeacute;ðr við H&aolig;sculld<note place=apparatus id=an245.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> H&aolig;sk&apos;, Cd.</note>; <anchor id=a245.2>faðer hans vas Herjolfr. H&aolig;scollr átte ser dóttor es Hallgerðr <anchor id=a245.3>hét ... br&oeacute;ðr Hallgerðar vóro þeir Þórleikr, faðer Bolla; ok Oláfr, <anchor id=a245.4>faðer Ceartans; ok Bárðr. [II. <hi rend=bold>14</hi>, <hi rend=bold>15.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a245.5>36. [Ch. 115] Snorre hét maðr, es kallaðr vas Goðe: hann bió<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a245.6>at Helga-felle, áðr Goðrún Osvitrs dótter keypte at hónom landet, <anchor id=a245.7>ok bió hon þar til elle; en Snorre fór þá til Hvamms-fiarðar ok <anchor id=a245.8>bió í Sælingsdals-tungo. Þórgrímr hét faðer (Snorra), ok vas Þórsteins <anchor id=a245.9>(son) Þorska-bíz, Þórolfs sonar Mostrar-skeggs, Ornolfs sonar <anchor id=a245.10>Fiskreka.&mdash;En Are<note place=apparatus id=an245.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Are]</ab> read Sæmundr?</note> enn Fróðe (sic) seger hann vesa son Þórgils<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a245.11>Reyðar-síðo.&mdash;Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg átte Osco, dótter Þórsteins <anchor id=a245.12>ens Rauða<note place=apparatus id=an245.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> rauða, Cd.</note>: móðer Þórgríms hét Þóra, dótter Óleifs Feilans, Þórsteins <anchor id=a245.13>sonar Rauðs, Óleifs sonar (ens) Hvíta, Ingiallz sonar, Helga <anchor id=a245.14>sonar. En móðer Ingiallz hét Þóra, dótter Sigurðar Orms-í-auga, <anchor id=a245.15>Ragnars sonar Loðbrócar: en móðer Snorra Goða vas Þórdís,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a245.16>Súrs dótter, syster Gísla. [II. <hi rend=bold>10.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a245.17>37. [Ch. 139.] Eyjolfr hét maðr; hann vas Bolverks son, Eyjolfs <anchor id=a245.18>sonar ens Grá or Ot<hi>t</hi>ra-dale, Þórðar sonar Gelliss, Óleifs sonar <anchor id=a245.19>Feilans. Móðer Eyjolfs Grá vas Hróðný, dótter Miðfiarðar <anchor id=a245.20>Skeggja, Skinna-Biarnar sonar, Skútaðar-Skeggja<note place=apparatus id=an245.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Skinna ... -Skeggja s.]</ab> add. 132, G.</note> sonar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p><anchor id=a245.21>38. [Ch. 101.] Með hónum fór sá maðr Íslenzkr er Guðleifr <anchor id=a245.22>hét, hann vas sonr Ara Márs<note place=apparatus id=an245.5><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> Mass, Cd.</note> sonar, Atla sonar, Ulfs sonar ens <anchor id=a245.23>Skiálga, H&aolig;gna sonar ens Hvíta, Ótryggs sonar, Óblauðs sonar, <anchor id=a245.24>Hiorleifs sonar ens Kven-sama H&aolig;rðalannz konungs. [II. <hi rend=bold>19.</hi>]


<div2 n=B lang=is>
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>B.</ab> <hi rend=sc>From other Sagas.</hi></head>

<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi rend=sc>From Laxdola Saga.</hi> (Cd. = AM. 132; W = Watz-hyrna; fragm. = Add. 20.)</head>


<p><anchor id=a245.25>1. Born þeirra Óláfs ok Aldísar vóro, Þórðr Gellir ... hána<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a245.26>átte Þórarenn Raga-bróðer L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr. [See Landn. <anchor id=a245.27>II. <hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 14.]

<p><anchor id=a245.28>2. [Ch. 31.] Goðmundr hét maðr, Solmundar son; hann bió í <anchor id=a245.29>Ásbiarnar-nese í Víði-dale; Goðmundr vas auðigr maðr; hann <anchor id=a245.30>bað Þóríðar ok gat hána með miklo fé. Þóríðr vas vitr kona ok<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a245.31>skap-stór, ok sk&aolig;rungr mikill. Hallr hét son þeirra, ok Barðe, <anchor id=a245.32>Steinn ok Steingrímr. Goðrún hét dótter þeirra ok Álof. Þórbi&aolig;rg, <anchor id=a245.33>dótter Óláfs, vas kvenna vænst ok þreklig; hon vas k&aolig;lloð <anchor id=a245.34>Þórbi&aolig;rg Digra, ok vas gift vestr í Vatz-fi&aolig;rð Ásgeire Knattar-syne<note place=apparatus id=an245.6><ab type=lineNumRef>34.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Knattar-s.]</ab> fragm.; Snartar-s., Cd.; Svartar, W.</note>; <anchor id=a245.35>hann vas g&aolig;figr maðr: þeirra sonr vas Ceartan, faðer Þórvallz,<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a245.36>f. Þórðar, f. Snorra, f. Þórvallz&mdash;Þaðan es komet Vatzfirðinga <anchor id=a245.37>kyn. Síðan átte Þórbi&aolig;rgo Vermundr Þórgrímsson: þeirra <anchor id=a245.38>dótter vas Þórfinna, es átte Þórsteinn Cugga son. Bergþóra Oláfs <anchor id=a245.39>dótter vas gift vestr í Diúpa-fi&aolig;rð Þórhalle goða, syne Odda Yra<hi>r</hi> <anchor id=a245.40>sonar<note place=apparatus id=an245.7><ab type=lineNumRef>39.</ab> syne ... Yra<hi>r</hi> s.] add. fragm.</note>; þeirra son vas Ceartan, faðer Smið-Sturlo; hann vas fóstre<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a245.41>Þórðar Gils sonar, f&aolig;ðor Sturlo<note place=apparatus id=an245.8><ab type=lineNumRef>41.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Sturlo]</ab> add. fragm.</note>.

<pb id=pb246 n=246><p><anchor id=a246.1>3. [Ch. 32.] Osvifr hét maðr, ok vas Helga son, Óttars sonar, <anchor id=a246.2>Biarnar sonar ens Aust-r&oeacute;na, Ketils sonar Flatnefs, Biarnar sonar <anchor id=a246.3>Bunu: móðer Osvifrs hét Niðbiorg; hennar móðer Caðlín, dótter <anchor id=a246.4>Gaungu-Hrólfs, &OElig;xna-Þóres sonar; hann vas herser ágætr austr í <anchor id=a246.5>Vík&mdash;Því var hann Oxna-Þórir<note place=apparatus id=an246.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Oxna-Þ.]</ab> W; þvi var h. svá, k. Cd.</note> kallaðr, at hann átte eyjar þriár, ok átta<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a246.6>tige yxna í hverre; hann gaf eina eyna ok yxnena með Hákone<note place=apparatus id=an246.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hákone]</ab><corr sic=","></corr> thus 132, W, fragm.</note> <anchor id=a246.7>konunge; ok varð sú gi&aolig;f all-fræg. Osvifr vas spekingr mikill; <anchor id=a246.8>hann bió at Laugom í Sælings-dale&mdash;Lauga-b&oeacute;r stendr fyr norðan<note place=apparatus id=an246.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>norðan]</ab> fragm.; sunnan, 132, W.</note> <anchor id=a246.9>Sælingsdals-&aoacute; gegnt Tungo&mdash;Kona hans hét Þórdís, dótter Þióðolfs<note place=apparatus id=an246.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Þórolfs, fragm.</note> <anchor id=a246.10>ens<note place=apparatus id=an246.5><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ens]</ab> add. W.</note> Lága. Óspakr hét son þeirra; annarr Helge; þriðe Vandráðr;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a246.11>fiórðe Torráðr; fimte Þórólfr. Aller vóro þeir vígleger menn. <anchor id=a246.12>Goðrún hét dótter þeirra. [II. <hi rend=bold>9.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a246.13>4. [Ch. 40.] Ásgeirr hét maðr, ok vas kallaðr Æðe-collr, hann <anchor id=a246.14>bió at Ásgeirs-&aoacute; í Víðedale; hann vas sonr Auðunnar Skokuls&mdash;Hann <anchor id=a246.15>kom fyrst sínna kyns-manna til Íslannz; hann nam Víðe-dal.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a246.16>Annarr son Auðunnar hét Þórgrímr Hæro-collr; hann vas <anchor id=a246.17>faðer Ásmundar, f&aolig;ðor Grettis.

<p><anchor id=a246.18>Ásgeirr Æðe-collr átte fimm b&aolig;rn&mdash;Son þeirra hét Auðunn; <anchor id=a246.19>faðer Ásgeirs, f. Auðunnar, f. Egils, es átte Ulfeiðe, dóttor Eyjolfs <anchor id=a246.20>en Halta; þeirra sonr vas Eyjolfr, es vegenn vas á Alþinge.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a246.21>Annarr son Ásgeirs hét Þórvaldr; hans dótter Dalla, es átte Ísleifr <anchor id=a246.22>byscop; þeirra sonr vas Gizor byscop. Enn þriðe sonr Ásgeirs <anchor id=a246.23>hét Kalfr.... Dótter Ásgeirs hét Þóríðr; hon vas gift Þórkatle <anchor id=a246.24>Cugga, syne Þórðar Gellis; þeirra son vas Þorsteinn. Onnor dótter <anchor id=a246.25>Ásgeirs hét Hrefna ... (<hi>who marries Ceartan</hi>). [III. <hi rend=bold>4.</hi>]<ab type=lineNum>25</ab>


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi rend=sc>From Bergsbok.</hi> (Cd. Holm. on an inserted slip.) <hi>North and West.</hi></head>

<p><anchor id=a246.26>5. M&aolig;rgom m&aolig;nnom þyckir fræði ok skemtan í at vita hverso <anchor id=a246.27>ætter Íslendinga koma saman við h&aolig;fðingja &aelig;tter í Norege, ok <anchor id=a246.28>einkanliga við konunga-ætternar sialfar, efter því sem ener mesto <anchor id=a246.29>fræðe-menn hafa saman-sett, ok sialfar landnáms b&oeacute;krnar vátta.

<p><anchor id=a246.30>Onundr hét maðr, ok var kallaðr Tréfótr, son Óleifs Bullo-fótar,<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a246.31>Ívars sonar Beitils; hann barðez í móte Haralde konunge í Hafrs-firðe, <anchor id=a246.32>ok lét þar fót sínn. Efter þat fór hann til Íslannz, ok nam <anchor id=a246.33>land frá Kleifom til Ofæro, Kallbaks-vík, Kolbeins-vík, Byrgis-vík, <anchor id=a246.34>ok bió í Kallbak til elle. Hann vas bróðer Guðbiargar, móðor <anchor id=a246.35>Guðbrannz Kúlu, f. Ástu, m. Oláfs ens Helga. Þórný vas syster<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a246.36>Ástu, m. Hallvarz ens Helga; &aolig;nnor Ísgerðr, m. Steigar-Þóriss. <anchor id=a246.37>Sonr Onundar hét Gretter, f. Surtz, f. Þórunnar Skalld-kono. <anchor id=a246.38>Halla hét dótter Grettis, m. Kára þess er tulkare var kallaðr&mdash;hann <anchor id=a246.39>átte tvá kn&aolig;rro senn í f&aolig;rom; hann var faðer Þóris, f. Gunnlaugs <anchor id=a246.40>á Skalmar-nese.<ab type=lineNum>40</ab>

<p><anchor id=a246.41>Þórgeirr Flosco-bakr var annarr son Onundar, faðer Þórmóðar <anchor id=a246.42>læknis. Þriðe var Ásgeirr Æði-collr, faðer Kalfs, ok Hrefnu, es <anchor id=a246.43>átte Ceartan Óláfsson, ok Þóríðar<note place=apparatus id=an246.6><ab type=lineNumRef>43.</ab> Þoriðr, Cd.</note>, er Þórkell Cugge átte, en síðarr <anchor id=a247.1><pb id=pb247 n=247>Steinþórr Óláfsson. Hinn fiórðe son Onundar var Þórgrímr Hæru-collr, <anchor id=a247.2>faðer Ásmundar Hæru-langs, f&aolig;ðor Grettis ens Sterka, Þór&shy;steins <anchor id=a247.3>ok Atla. Þórbi&aolig;rn Ongull vá Gretti; en Þórsteinn vá Þór&shy;bi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a247.4>út í Mikla-garðe, ok hefnde Grettis. [II. <hi rend=bold>29.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a247.5>Hunda-Steinarr hét iarl á Englande; hann átte Álofo, dóttor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a247.6>Ragnars Loðbrócar, Sigurðar sonar Hrings: móðer hennar var <anchor id=a247.7>Þóra Borgar-hi&aolig;rtr, dótter Herraðar iarls á Gautlande. Þeirra <anchor id=a247.8>b&aolig;rn vóro þau, Bi&aolig;rn, faðer Auðunnar Skokuls; ok Eirikr, faðer <anchor id=a247.9>Sigurðar Bióða-skalla, f. Eireks á Opro-stoðom, f. Ástríðar, m. <anchor id=a247.10>Oláfs konungs Tryggva sonar. Ísgerðr var dótter þeirra Steinars<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a247.11>iarls, er átte Þórer iarl í Verma-lande. Auðunn Skokull fór til <anchor id=a247.12>Íslannz ok nam Víðe-dal; hans dótter var Þóra Moshals, m. Ulf&shy;hildar, <anchor id=a247.13>m. Asto, m. Oláfs konungs Helga. Son Auðunnar var <anchor id=a247.14>Ásgeirr at Ásgeirs-&aoacute;; hann átte Iórunne, dóttor Ingimundar ens <anchor id=a247.15>Gamla, Þórsteins sonar, Ketils sonar Þrums, Orms sonar Skelja-mola,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a247.16>Hrossbiarnar sonar, Raums sonar, Iotunbiarnar sonar norðan <anchor id=a247.17>or Norege. Ketill átte Mioll, dóttor Áns Bog-sveigiss. B&aolig;rn <anchor id=a247.18>þeirra Ásgeirs ok Þórunnar vóro þau Þórvaldr, etc. [III. <hi rend=bold>4.</hi>]


<div3>
<head><hi rend=sc>From Glúma.</hi></head>

<p><anchor id=a247.19>6. B&aolig;ðvarr hét maðr; hann vas son Víkinga-Kára, ok bróðer <anchor id=a247.20>Sigurðar, f&aolig;ðor Vigfúss; hann var faðer Ástríðar, móðor Eireks,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a247.21>f&aolig;ðor Ástríðar, móðor Oláfs Tryggva sonar. Víkinga-Káre var <anchor id=a247.22>son Eymundar Aska-spillis, Þóris sonar. B&aolig;ðvarr vas faðer Álofar, <anchor id=a247.23>móðor Gizorar ens Hvíta.


<div3>
<head><hi rend=sc>From Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Life.</hi></head>

<p lang=en-UK>(AM. 61 (fol.) in Gizur&apos;s speech, see Cristni Saga.)

<p><anchor id=a247.24>7. Hialte er Skeggja son, Þórgeirs sonar, Eilífs sonar, Ketils <anchor id=a247.25>sonar ens Ein-henda. Móðer Hialta var Þórgerðr, dótter Hlífar,<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a247.26>dóttor Torf-Einars iarls, Rognvallz sonar M&oeacute;ra iarls. En ek em, <anchor id=a247.27>sagðe Gizorr, son Teitz Ketilbiarnar sonar, Ketils sonar ríks <anchor id=a247.28>mannz or Naumu-dale. Móðer Ketilbiarnar hét Æsa, dótter Há&shy;konar <anchor id=a247.29>iarls Griótgarz sonar.  Móðer Teitz f&aolig;ðor míns, sagðe <anchor id=a247.30>Gizurr, vas Helga, dótter Þórðar Skeggja, Hrapps sonar, Biarnar<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a247.31>sonar Bunu, Veðr-Gríms sonar. En móðer mín vas Ál&aolig;f, dótter <anchor id=a247.32>B&aolig;ðvars, sonar Víkinga-Kára. Var B&aolig;ðvarr bróðer Eireks af <anchor id=a247.33>Ofro-stoðom móðor-f&aolig;ðor þíns, konungr! [V. <hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 6.]


<div3>
<head><hi rend=sc>From Sturlunga</hi> I (vol. i, pp. 5, 6).</head>

<p lang=en-UK><hi>The Pedigree of Skard-Snorre</hi> (died 1170).

<p><anchor id=a247.34>8. Dótter Geirmundar vas Ýr, móðer Þóroddz, f. Brodda, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a247.35>Hallbero, es átte B&aolig;rkr, son Þórmóðar Þióstars sonar.<ab type=lineNum>35</ab>

<p><anchor id=a247.36>9. Steinolfr enn Láge, son Hrólfs hersiss af Ogðom, nam land <anchor id=a247.37>miðle Búðardals-ár ok Tialda-ness, ok bió í Fagra-dale; hans <anchor id=a247.38>dótter vas Helga, móðer Hyrnings Oláfs<sic>&beta;</sic>., es átte Arndíse, dóttor <anchor id=a247.39>Geirmundar Heljar-skinnz; þeirra dótter vas Frið-gerðr, móðer <anchor id=a248.1><pb id=pb248 n=248>Sneris Þóroddz sonar, f. Odda, f. Þórgils Odda sonar. Onnor <anchor id=a248.2>dótter Steinolfs ens Lága or Fagra-dale vas Arndís, móðer Þórðar, <anchor id=a248.3>f. Þórgerðar, m. Hrafns, f. Snartar, f. Védísar, m. H&aolig;llo, m. Yng&shy;villdar, <anchor id=a248.4>es átte Snorre l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr [<hi>died</hi> 1170] faðer Narfa, f. <anchor id=a248.5>Skarð-Snorra.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p><anchor id=a248.6>10. Ingolfr Arnar son, hann stað-festez fyrstr á Íslande land-náms-manna, <anchor id=a248.7>svá at menn kunne ætter sínar til at telja. Ingolfr <anchor id=a248.8>vas faðer Þórsteins, f. Þórkels Mána L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz: Þórhildr vas <anchor id=a248.9>dótter Þórsteins Ingolfs sonar, móðer Þórkels, f. Ketils, f. Hauks, <anchor id=a248.10>f. Yngvilldar, m. Snorra, f. Narfa, f. Skarð-Snorra.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p><anchor id=a248.11>Hrollaugr hét sonr R&aolig;gnvallz iarls á M&oeacute;re: frá hónom ero Síðo-menn <anchor id=a248.12>komner. Hans sonr vas Ozorr, f. Þórdísar, m. Hallz á Síðo.

<p><anchor id=a248.13>Egill, sonr Hallz, vas faðer Þórgerðar, m. Ioans byscops.

<p><anchor id=a248.14>Yngvilldr Hallz dótter vas móðer Þóreyjar, m. Sæmundar ens <anchor id=a248.15>Fróða.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a248.16>Þórvarðr Hallz son vas faðer Þórdísar, m. Ióreiðar, m. Hallz <anchor id=a248.17>prestz í Hauka-dale, Teitz sonar.

<p><anchor id=a248.18>Þórsteinn Hallz son vas faðer Magnúss, f. Einars, f. Magnúss <anchor id=a248.19>byscops.

<p><anchor id=a248.20>Liótr Hallz son vas faðer Goðrúnar, m. Einars Ara sonar, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a248.21>Steinunnar, m. Guðmundar ok Hallbero, m. Þórgils, f. Húnboga, <anchor id=a248.22>f. Snorra, f. Narfa, f. Skarð-Snorra.

<p><anchor id=a248.23>Móðer Skarð-Snorra vas Goðrún, Þórðar dótter, Oddleifs sonar, <anchor id=a248.24>Þórðar sonar Kráko-nefs.

<p><anchor id=a248.25>Þesse vóro systkin Skarð-Snorra: Þórðr es átte Ióreiðe, Hallz&shy;dóttor;<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a248.26>þeirra dótter var Helga, er Sturla átte Þórðar son L&aolig;g&shy;maðr. <anchor id=a248.27>Þórbi&aolig;rn vas laun-getenn ok Halldís. Yngvellde, systor <anchor id=a248.28>Snorra, átte Gunnsteinn Hallzson; hon var móðer Vígfúss ok <anchor id=a248.29>þeirra systkina. Guðríðr, syster Snorra, vas móðer Guðmundar <anchor id=a248.30>prestz Óláfs sonar ok þeirra systkina. Hallgerðe, systor Snorra,<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a248.31>hána átte Þórðr under Felli; hon vas móðer Snorra ok Guðmundar, <anchor id=a248.32>ok Yngvildar, m. Petrs í Skógar-nese, Snorra sonar.

<p><anchor id=a248.33>Bi&aolig;rn, son Ketils Flatnefs, vas faðer Ceallacs, f. Þórgríms, f. <anchor id=a248.34>Vémundar, f. Yngvildar, m. Þórðar, f. Yngvilldar, m. Snorra Hún&shy;boga <anchor id=a248.35>sonar.<ab type=lineNum>35</ab>

<p><anchor id=a248.36>Dalcr vas bróðer Þórgils Hafliða sonar; hann vas faðer Bersa, <anchor id=a248.37>f. Halldórs prestz í Saurb&oeacute;, f. Þórsteins es átte Ingegerðe, Philippus <anchor id=a248.38>dóttor, Sæmundar sonar.


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>Pedigree of Thorgils Oddason and the Reyknesings.</hi></head>

<p><anchor id=a248.39>11. Þórgils vas sonr Odda, Sneris sonar, Þóroddz sonar. Móðer <anchor id=a248.40>Sneris vas Friðgerðr Hyrnings dótter. Hyrningr átte Arndíse,<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a248.41>dóttor Geirmundar Heljar-skinnz. Móðer Odda Sneris sonar vas <anchor id=a248.42>Álof, dótter Bitro-Odda, Þórbiarnar sonar. Móðer Bitro-Odda vas <anchor id=a248.43>Yngvilldr, dótter Álfs í D&aolig;lom. Yngvillde hafðe átte Þórvaldr Eyr-goðe, <anchor id=a248.44>Steingríms son, es nam Steingríms-fi&aolig;rð ok bió í Trolla-tungo.&mdash;Sá <anchor id=a248.45>kyn-þ&aolig;ttr Þórgils Odda sonar es sumom ókunnare an<ab type=lineNum>45</ab> <anchor id=a249.1><pb id=pb249 n=249>Reyknesinga.&mdash;Hallbera hét móðer hans, dótter Ara af Reykja-nese. <anchor id=a249.2>Kolfinna hét kona Þórgils, dótter Hallz Styrmis sonar, Þórgeirs <anchor id=a249.3>sonar frá Ásgeirs-&aoacute;, etc. [see Sturl., vol. i, p. 8].

<p><anchor id=a249.4>12. Þeir br&oeacute;ðr Þórgils ok Illoge vóro syner Ara Márs<note place=apparatus id=an249.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Márs]</ab> Olafs, Cd.</note> sonar, <anchor id=a249.5>Ulfs sonar ens Skiálga es nam Reykja-nes, H&aolig;gna sonar ens<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a249.6>Hvíta, Ótryggs sonar, Óblauðs sonar, Hiorleifs sonar konongs. <anchor id=a249.7>Þórgerðr hét móðer þeirra Þórgils ok Illoga; hon vas dótter Alfs <anchor id=a249.8>or D&aolig;lom. Móðer Alfs vas Hildr, Þórsteins dótter ens Rauða, <anchor id=a249.9>Óleifs sonar ens Hvíta, Ingiallz sonar, Fróða sonar. Móðer hennar <anchor id=a249.10>vas Þóra, dótter Sigurðar Orms-í auga: móðer Sigurðar vas Áslaug,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a249.11>dótter Sigurðar Fáfnes-bana. Þórgeirr Hávars son vas systrungr <anchor id=a249.12>Þórgils Ara sonar.&mdash;<hi>Fóstbr&oelig;ðra Saga</hi>, <foreign lang=en-UK>[AM. 132, the Flatey-book <anchor id=a249.13>and Cod. Reg. omit this pedigree.]</foreign>


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>Snorre-Gode&apos;s Children</hi> (Eyrb., last chapter).</head>

<p><anchor id=a249.14>13. Hann batt tengðer við en mezto stór-menne í Breiða-firðe <anchor id=a249.15>ok víðarr annar-staðar.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a249.16>Hann gifte dóttor sína Sigríðe Brande enom Orva, syne Vermundar <anchor id=a249.17>ens Mióva; hána átte síðarr Colle Þórmóðar son, Þórláks <anchor id=a249.18>sonar bróðor Steinþórs á Eyre; ok bioggo þau í Biarnar-h&aolig;fn.

<p><anchor id=a249.19>Unne, dóttor sína, gifte hann Víga-Barða; hána átte síðarr <anchor id=a249.20>Sigurðr, son Þóriss Hundz or Biarkey á Háloga-lande, ok vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a249.21>þeirra dótter Rannveig, es átte Ioan, son Arna, Arna sonar, Arnmóðs <anchor id=a249.22>sonar; þeirra son vas Víðcunnr or Biarkey, es einn hefer <anchor id=a249.23>veret hellztr lendra manna í Norege.

<p><anchor id=a249.24>Snorre gifte dóttor sína Þórdíse Bolla, Bolla syne: ok ero af <anchor id=a249.25>þeim komner Gils-beckingar.<ab type=lineNum>25</ab>

<p><anchor id=a249.26>Hallbero, dóttor sína, gifte Snorre Þórðe, syne Sturlo Þióðreks <anchor id=a249.27>sonar; þeirra dótter vas Þórríðr, es átte Hafliðe Márs son: ok es <anchor id=a249.28>þaðan komen mikil ætt.

<p><anchor id=a249.29>Þóro, dóttor sína, gifte Snorre Cero-Bersa, syne Halldórs Óláfs <anchor id=a249.30>sonar or Hiarðar-hollti; hána átte síðan Þórgrímr Sviðe: ok es<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a249.31>þaðan komen mikil ætt ok g&aolig;fog.

<p><anchor id=a249.32>En aðrar d&oeacute;t<hi>t</hi>r Snorra vóro giftar at hónom dauðom:&mdash;

<p><anchor id=a249.33>Þórríðe ena Sp&aolig;ko, Snorra dóttor, átte Gunnlaugr son Steinþórs <anchor id=a249.34>af Eyre.

<p><anchor id=a249.35>En Goðrúno, dóttor Snorra Goða, átte Kalfr [<hi>or</hi> Kolfiðr] af Sól&shy;heimom.<ab type=lineNum>35</ab>

<p><anchor id=a249.36>Halldóro Snorra dóttor átte Þórgeirr or Ásgarðz-hólom.

<p><anchor id=a249.37>Alófo Snorra dóttor átte Iorundr Þórfinnz son, bróðer Guðlaugs <anchor id=a249.38>or Straumfirðe.

<p><anchor id=a249.40>Halldórr, Snorra son Goða, vas g&aolig;fgastr sona hans; hann bió í<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a249.41>Hiarðar-holte í Laxár-dale. Frá hónom ero komner Sturlungar <anchor id=a249.42>ok Vatzfirðingar.

<p><anchor id=a249.43>Þóroddr, Snorra son Goða, vas annarr g&aolig;fgastr; hann bió at <anchor id=a249.44>Spákono-felle á Skaga-str&aolig;nd.

<pb id=pb250 n=250><p><anchor id=a250.1>Máne, son Snorra, bió a<hi>t</hi> Sauða-felle; hans son vas Liótr, es kallaðr <anchor id=a250.2>vas Mána-Liótr: hann vas kallaðr mestr sona-sona Snorra Goða.

<p><anchor id=a250.3>Þórsteinn Snorra son bió at Laugar-brecko: ok ero frá hónom <anchor id=a250.4>komner Ásbirningar í Skagafirðe, ok mikil ætt.

<p><anchor id=a250.5>En Þórðr Kause, son Snorra, bió í Dufgus-dale.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p><anchor id=a250.6>Eyjolfr, son Snorra Goða, bió á Lamba-st&aolig;ðom á Mýrom.

<p><anchor id=a250.7>Þórleifr, son Snorra Goða, bió á Meðal-fellz-str&aolig;nd: frá hónom <anchor id=a250.8>ero komner Ballæringar.

<p><anchor id=a250.9>Snorre, son Snorra Goða, bió í Tungo efter f&aolig;ðor sínn.

<p><anchor id=a250.10>Kleppr [<hi>or</hi> Klyppr] hét son Snorra Goða, ok vito menn eige<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a250.11>bú-stað hans, ok eige vito menn ne einar s&aolig;gor af hónom.


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>Descendants of Herdis Bolle&apos;s Daughter</hi> [Laxd. S., ch. from 309].</head>

<p><anchor id=a250.12>14. Herdís, Bolla dótter, vóx upp at Helga-felle, ok vas allra <anchor id=a250.13>kvenna vænst; hennar bað Ormr, son Hermundar, Illuga sonar <anchor id=a250.14>ens Svarta: var Herdís gift Orme; fór hon til búss með hónom í <anchor id=a250.15>Calmans-tungo ...<note place=apparatus id=an250.1 lang="en-UK"><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> Links must be missing here.</note> þeirra son vas Coðran, es átte Guðrúno Sig&shy;mundar<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a250.16>dóttor; son Coðrans hét Hermundr; hann átte Alfeiðe<note place=apparatus id=an250.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Ulbeiðe, 132.</note>, <anchor id=a250.17>dóttor Rúnolfs, Ketils sonar byscops; syner þeirra vóro, Ketill <anchor id=a250.18>[<hi>died</hi> 1220], es ábóte vas at Helga-felle, ok Hreinn, Coðran, ok <anchor id=a250.19>Styrmer.

<p><anchor id=a250.20>Dótter Orms ok Herdísar Bolla dóttor hét Þórv&aolig;r; hána átte<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a250.21>Skegge Brannz son.&mdash;Þaðan es komet Skógverja-kyn.

<p><anchor id=a250.22>Óspakr hét son Bolla ok Þórdísar: dótter Óspaks Bolla sonar <anchor id=a250.23>hét Goðrún; hána átte Þórarenn Brannz son; þeirra son vas <anchor id=a250.24>Brandr, es staðenn sette at Húsa-felle; hans son vas Sighvatr <anchor id=a250.25>prestr es þar bió lenge síðan.<ab type=lineNum>25</ab>

<p><anchor id=a250.26>Geller Þórkelsson kvángaz nú; hann feck Valgerðar, dóttor <anchor id=a250.27>Þórgils Ara sonar af Reykja-nese; hann varð h&aolig;fðinge mikill. <anchor id=a250.28>Geller fór útan ok vas með Magnúse enom Góða, ok þá af hónom <anchor id=a250.29>tolf aura gollz ok mikit fé annat. Syner Gelless vóro þeir Þórkell <anchor id=a250.30>ok Þórgils: son Þórgils vas Are enn Fróðe; son Ara hét Þórgils;<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a250.31>hans son vas Are enn Sterke.&mdash;<hi>Laxd.</hi>, AM. 309.


<p><hi>Hall o&apos; Side&apos;s Descendants</hi> [from the end (extant in a single copy) of Thorstan Hall o&apos; Side&apos;s Son&apos;s Saga].

<p><anchor id=a250.32>15. .... [<hi lang=en-UK>Defective</hi>] .... (Þórvaldr var) bróðer Ióreiðar, faðer <anchor id=a250.33>Helga ok Gríms Droplaugar sona [blank] Hallkatla móðer Þórkels <anchor id=a250.34>Geitis sonar í Crossavík.

<p><anchor id=a250.35>Ólof hét syster Hallz á Síðu; hon var móðer Kolbeins Flosa<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a250.36>sonar, Þórðar sonar Freys-goða at Svína-felle.

<p><anchor id=a250.37>Liótr, son Hallz, átto Helgo, dóttor Einars frá Þver-&aoacute;, ok vas <anchor id=a250.38>þeirra dótter Goðrún, es átte Are Þórgils son af Reykja-nese.

<p><anchor id=a250.39>Annarr son Hallz vas Þórsteinn (er nú hefer veret frá sagt um <anchor id=a250.40>hríð).<ab type=lineNum>40</ab>

<p><anchor id=a250.41>Þriðe son Hallz vas Egill, hann átte Þórlaugo, dóttor Þórvallz <anchor id=a251.1><pb id=pb251 n=251>or Áse or Hiallta-dale; þeirra dótter vas Þórgerðr, móðer Ioans <anchor id=a251.2>byscops ens Helga.

<p><anchor id=a251.3>Colr var enn fiórðe son Hallz; hann átte Álofu dóttor Ozorar <anchor id=a251.4>frá Breið-&aoacute;.

<p><anchor id=a251.5>Fimte son Hallz vas Þórvarðr, faðer Þórdísar, móðor Iórunnar,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a251.6>er átte Teitr<note place=apparatus id=an251.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Fimte ... er átte Teitr]</ab> emendated, Dótter Hallz var Groa er átte Teitr son Gizorar Hvíta, þeirra son var Hallr, etc., Cd.</note>, son Ísleifs byscops, Gizorar sonar ens Hvíta; þeirra <anchor id=a251.7>son [<hi>i.e. the son of</hi> Tait] var Hallr, faðer Gizorar, f. þeirra Magnúss <anchor id=a251.8>bps, ok Þórvallz, f. Gizorar.

<p><anchor id=a251.9>Yngvildr hét dótter Hallz; hána átte Eyjolfr, son Guðmundar <anchor id=a251.10>ens Ríka af M&aolig;ðro-v&aolig;llom; þeirra dótter vas Þórey, móðer Sæmundar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a251.11>ens Fróða, f. Loptz, f. Ioans<note place=apparatus id=an251.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Ioans]</ab> om. Cd. The clause in brackets is a repetition from above.</note>, f. Sæmundar í Odda. [Teitr Ísleifsson <anchor id=a251.12>átte Iórunne; hennar móðer var Þórdís, dótter Þórvarðz<note place=apparatus id=an251.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> Þorvaldz, Cd.</note> Hallz&shy;sonar <anchor id=a251.13>af Síðo.]

<p><anchor id=a251.14>Þórgerðe, dóttor Hallz á Síðo, átte Þórgrímr, son Digr-Ketils.

<p><anchor id=a251.15>Gró, dóttor Hallz á Síðo, átte<note place=apparatus id=an251.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>átte]</ab> átte síðan, Cd.</note> Snorre Kalfsson, en efter hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a251.16>átte Gró Þórvarðr Kr&aoacute;ko-nef.

<p><anchor id=a251.17>Þórdíse, dóttor Síðo-Hallz, átte Þórðr Halldórsson or Fors-ár-skógom.

<p><anchor id=a251.18>Gille [Thorstan o&apos; Side&apos;s thrall] þessi var son Iathguðs, Gilla <anchor id=a251.20>sonar, Biaðuchs sonar, Cearvals sonar, konungs af Írlande ens<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a251.21>Gamla, er þar ríkte lenge.&mdash;<hi>Ibid.</hi>


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>Horda-Kare&apos;s Generations.</hi></head>

<p><anchor id=a251.22>Á Horða-lande vóro þá menn marger ríker ok ágæter es komner <anchor id=a251.23>vóro frá Horða-Kára: Horða-Káre átte fióra sono&mdash;

<p><anchor id=a251.24>Einn vas Þórleifr enn Spake: annarr Ogmundr, faðer Þórolfs <anchor id=a251.25>Skíalgs, f. Erlings á Sóla: Þórðr enn þriðe, faðer Klypps hersiss<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a251.26>es drap Sigurð konung Slevu Gunhildar son: fiórðe son Horða-Kára <anchor id=a251.27>vas Olmóðr enn Gamle, faðer Áskels, f. Ásláks Fitja-skalla. <anchor id=a251.28>Vas þesse ætt-boge mestr ok g&aolig;fgaztr á Horða-lande es komenn <anchor id=a251.29>vas af ætt Horða-Kára.&mdash;<hi>Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Life.</hi>


<div3>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>The same.</hi></head>

<p><anchor id=a251.30>16. Hrólfr í Berge, Upplendinga konungr, var faðer S&oelig;lga<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a251.31>konungs, f. Boðvars konungs, (f.) Kauns, f. Þóris konungs Svira, <anchor id=a251.32>f. Onars konungs, (f.) Arnar Hyrnu. Hans syner vóro þeir Þórleifr <anchor id=a251.33>Hvala-skúfr, f. B&aolig;ðvars Snæþrymu, f. Þórleifs Miðlungs; <anchor id=a251.34>annarr Aslákr Bifro-Káre, faðer Ketils Horða-Kára: hann var <anchor id=a251.35>ágætr maðr ok réð fyrer Uppl&aolig;ndom: hann lagðe under sik þriá<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a251.36>konunga af sínne hreyste ok harð-fenge ok eignaðiz þeirra ríke. <anchor id=a251.37>Hann átte m&aolig;rg b&aolig;rn, ok er frá hónom komenn enn gildaste ætt-boge <anchor id=a251.38>ok mart stór-menne.

<p><anchor id=a251.39>Þesse vóro b&aolig;rn Horða-Kára. Þórleifr enn Spake, Ogmundr, <anchor id=a251.40>Olmóðr enn Gamle, Þórðr Hreða, Þóra móðer Ulfliótz es l&aolig;g<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a251.41>hafði til Íslannz. Ogmundr var f. Þórolfs Skialgs, f. Erlings á <anchor id=a252.1><pb id=pb252 n=252>Sóla. Olmóðr enn Gamle var faðer Áskels, f. Asláks Fitja-skalla, <anchor id=a252.2>f. Sveins Bryggjo-fótz, f. Bergþórs Bucks, f. Sveins. Gunnarr hét <anchor id=a252.3>son Laga-Ulfliótz; hann átte Þóro, dóttor Helga ens Magra; <anchor id=a252.4>þeirra sonr var Ketill í Diúpa-dale.

<p><anchor id=a252.5>Þórðr Hreða var fyrst kallaðr son Ketils Horða-Kára; hann var<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a252.6>ágætr maðr á Upplondom; hans son var Klyppr herser: annarr <anchor id=a252.7>son hans var Steingrímr: þriðe Eyjolfr: Sigríðr hét dótter hans. <anchor id=a252.8>Klyppr herser var enn ágætazte maðr af örve sínne ok at-gerve, <anchor id=a252.9>efter því sem forellre hans var til. Hann átte Ál&aolig;fo Asbiarnar <anchor id=a252.10>dóttor: þeirra dótter hét Guðrún, kvenna vænst ok vitruz ok sk&aolig;rungr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a252.11>enn meste. Þórðr Hreða kvángaðiz í elle sinne í annan tíma <anchor id=a252.12>efter er en fyrre kona hans var dauð: hann feck þá Helgo, Vémundar <anchor id=a252.13>dóttor Iarðlokars (!), Þórolfs-sonar Vága-nefs, Hr&oeacute;reks <anchor id=a252.14>sonar Sl&oelig;ngvan-bauga, Harallz sonar Hilde-tannar Dana konungs. <anchor id=a252.15>Þá f&oeacute;rðe Þórðr bygð sína í ey þá er Hising hét; hann var þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a252.16>bæðe gamall ok sk&aolig;llóttr; var þá skift um viðr-nefne hans ok var <anchor id=a252.17>hann þá kallaðr Þórðr Hísinga-skalle.&mdash;<hi>Thord Saga in Watz-hyrna.</hi>



<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->




<div1 id=s1.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 3.</ab> THE THORSNESS SETTLEMENT.</head>

<p>(Chapters 1&ndash;11 of Eyrbyggia Saga.)


<p>The eleven first chapters of the complex history known as Eyrbyggia Saga are of different composition to the rest of the matter to which they are prefixed. In style and content they are one with Are&apos;s work, and must be taken with it.

<p>The text of Eyrbyggia rests on five vellums:&mdash;


<table>
<row><cell>A. <cell>Watz-hyrna, extant in paper transcripts. AM. 448, AM. 442, AM. 146, fol.
<row><cell>M. <cell>Melabok, imperfect. AM. 445 b.
<row><cell>W. <cell>Wolfenbüttel, imperfect at beginning, but also represented by copy AM. 446.
<row><cell>B. <cell>AM. 309. Imperfect, has beginning, but not end.
<row><cell>   <cell>AM. Add. 20 fol. imperfect, a small fragment.
</table>


<p>The best of these is the Watz-hyrna text. Watz-hyrna was a contemporary of Flatey-book and of the 14th century: it was destroyed in the Copenhagen fire of 1728.

<p>The part of the 4th chapter which describes the temple is really a gloss put in from another work, and it will be found in its place with other like fragments in Book II. § 2.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<div2 lang=is id=thorness rend="align-with(en.thorness)">

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a252.18><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ketill Flatnefr</hi> hét herser einn ágætr<note place=apparatus id=an252.1><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>herser einn ágætr]</ab> Cd.</note> í Norege; <anchor id=a252.19>hann vas sonr Biarnar Bunu, Gríms sonar hersess or <anchor id=a253.1><pb id=pb253 n=253>Sogne. Ketill Flatnefr vas kvángaðr; hann átte Yngvilde<note place=apparatus id=an253.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Yngvolde, B.</note>, dóttor <anchor id=a253.2>Ketils Veðrs hersess af Rauma-ríke. Bi&aolig;rn ok Helge héto syner <anchor id=a253.3>þeirra, en d&oeacute;ttr þeirra vóro þ&oelig;r Auðr en Diúp-auðga ok Iórunn <anchor id=a253.4>Manviz-brecka. Bi&aolig;rn, son Ketils, vas fóstraðr austr á Iamta-lande<note place=apparatus id=an253.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Iamta-lande]</ab> (sic!).</note> <anchor id=a253.5>með iarle þeim es Ceallacr hét, vitr maðr ok ágætr. Iórunn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a253.6>átte son es Bi&aolig;rn hét, en Giaflaug hét dótter hans.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a253.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þetta vas í þann tíma es Haralldr konungr enn Hárfagre <anchor id=a253.8>geck til ríkiss í Norege. Fyr þeim ófriðe flýðo marger g&aolig;fger <anchor id=a253.9>menn óðul sín af Norege, sumer austr um Ki&aolig;lo, sumer vestr um <anchor id=a253.10>haf: þeir vóro sumer, es héldo sik á vetrom í Suðreyjom eðr í<note place=apparatus id=an253.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>í]</ab> add. B.</note><ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a253.11>Orkneyjom; en um sumrom herjoðo þeir í Noreg, ok g&oelig;rðo <anchor id=a253.12>mikinn skaða í ríke Harallz konungs. B&oeacute;ndr kærðo þetta fyr <anchor id=a253.13>konunge, ok b&aoacute;ðo hann frelsa sik af þessom ófriðe. Þá g&oelig;rðe <anchor id=a253.14>Haralldr konungr þat ráð, at hann lét búa her vestr um haf, ok <anchor id=a253.15>kvað Ketil Flatnef skyldo h&aolig;fðingja vesa yfer þeim her. Ketill<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a253.16>talðesk undan, en konungr kvað hann þó<note place=apparatus id=an253.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þó]</ab> add. B.</note> fara skyldo. Ok es <anchor id=a253.17>Ketill sá, at konungr vill ráða, ræzk hann til ferðarennar, ok hefer <anchor id=a253.18>með ser kono sína ok b&aolig;rn sín &aolig;ll<note place=apparatus id=an253.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sín &aolig;ll]</ab> add. B.</note>, þau sem þar vóro.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a253.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En es Ketill kom vestr um haf, átte hann nockorar orrostor, <anchor id=a253.20>ok hafðe iafnan sigr. Hann lagðe under sik Suðreyjar, ok g&oelig;rðesk<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a253.21>h&aolig;fðinge yfer; sættesk hann þá við ena st&oeacute;rsto h&aolig;fðingja <anchor id=a253.22>þá es vóro<note place=apparatus id=an253.6><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá es vóro]</ab> add. B.</note> fyr vestan haf, ok batt við þá tengðer, en sende <anchor id=a254.1><pb id=pb254 n=254>austr aftr<note place=apparatus id=an254.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>aftr]</ab> add. B.</note> herenn. Ok es þeir kómo á fund Harallz konungs, <anchor id=a254.2>s&aolig;gðo þeir, at Ketill Flatnefr vas h&aolig;fðinge í Suðreyjom; en eigi <anchor id=a254.3>s&aolig;gðosk þeir vita, at þat m&oelig;nde framm draga ríke Harallz konungs<note place=apparatus id=an254.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þat ... konungs]</ab> B; at hann dræge Haralde kge ríki, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a254.4>fyr vestan haf. En er konungr spyrr þetta, þá tekr hann under sik <anchor id=a254.5>eigner þær es Ketill átte í Norege.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a254.6><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ketill gifte Auðe, dóttor sína, Óleife enom Hvíta, es þá vas <anchor id=a254.7>mestr her-konungr fyr vestan haf; hann vas son Ingiallz, Helga <anchor id=a254.8>sonar, en móðer Ingiallz vas Þóra, dótter Sigurðar Orms-í-auga, <anchor id=a254.9>Ragnars sonar Loðbrócar. Þórunne Hyrnu gifte hann Helga enom <anchor id=a254.10>Magra, syne Eyvindar Austmannz ok Rafurtu, dóttor Cearvals Íra<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a254.11>konungs.

<p n=2.1><anchor id=a254.12><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Biorn</hi>, son Ketils Flatnefs, vas á Iamta-lande þar til <anchor id=a254.13>es Ceallacr iarl andaðesk. Hann feck Giaflaugar <anchor id=a254.14>dóttor iarls, ok fór síðan austan um Ki&aolig;l, fyrst til Þróndheims, ok <anchor id=a254.15>síðan suðr í<note place=apparatus id=an254.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>í]</ab> B; um, Cd.</note> land, ok tók under sik eigner þær es faðer hans hafðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a254.16>átt; en rak í braut ár-menn þá es Haralldr konungr hafðe þar sett.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a254.17><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Haraldr konungr vas þá í Víkenne es hann spurðe þetta; ok <anchor id=a254.18>fór þá et &oelig;fra norðr til Þróndheims: ok es hann kom í Þróndheim, <anchor id=a254.19>stefnde hann átta fylkja<note place=apparatus id=an254.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> fylkna, B.</note> þing; ok á því þinge g&oelig;rðe hann Bi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a254.20>Ketils son útlaga af Norege; g&oelig;rðe hann dræpan ok til-t&oelig;kjan<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a254.21>hvar sem yrðe<note place=apparatus id=an254.5><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>yrðe]</ab> B; være, Cd.</note> fundenn. Efter þetta sende hann Hauk Hábrók ok <anchor id=a254.22>aðra kappa sína, at drepa hann, ef þeir fynde hann. En es þeir <anchor id=a254.23>kómo suðr um Staðe, urðo viner Biarnar við varer ferð þeirra, ok <anchor id=a255.1><pb id=pb255 n=255>g&oelig;rðo hónom niósn. Bi&aolig;rn hlióp þá á skúto eina, es hann átte, <anchor id=a255.2>með skulda-lið sítt ok lausa-fé, ok fór undan suðr með lande&mdash;því <anchor id=a255.3>þá vas vetrar-megn, ok treystesk hann eige á haf at halda<note place=apparatus id=an255.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> á haf at sigla, B.</note>.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a255.4><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Bi&aolig;rn fór þar til es hann kom í ey þá es Mostr heiter, es liggr <anchor id=a255.5>fyr Sunn-Hörða-lande; ok þar tók við honom sá maðr, es Þórolfr<note place=apparatus id=an255.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> B; Hrólfr, A.</note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a255.6>(hét), Ornolfs son Fiskreka; þar vas Bi&aolig;rn um vetrenn á laun. <anchor id=a255.7>Konungs-menn hurfo aftr þá es þeir h&aolig;fðo skipat eigner Biarnar <anchor id=a255.8>af konungs hende<note place=apparatus id=an255.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>af konungs hende]</ab> add. B.</note>, ok setta menn yfer.

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a255.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórolfr</hi><note place=apparatus id=an255.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Hrólfr, A.</note> vas h&aolig;fðinge mikell, ok enn meste rausnar-maðr; <anchor id=a255.10>hann varð-veitte þar í eyjonne Þórs-hof<note place=apparatus id=an255.5><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> hof er helgat var Þór, ok var enn meste ástvin hans, B.</note>, ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a255.11>vas mikell vin Þórs&mdash;ok af því vas hann Þórolfr kallaðr&mdash;hann vas <anchor id=a255.12>mikell maðr ok sterkr, fríðr sýnom ok hafðe skegg miket&mdash;því var <anchor id=a255.13>hann kallaðr Mostrar-skegg&mdash;hann vas g&aolig;fgastr maðr í eyjonne<note place=apparatus id=an255.6><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> eyinne, Cd.</note>.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a255.14><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Um váret féck Þórolfr Birne lang-skip gótt ok skipat góðom <anchor id=a255.15>drengjom, ok feck Hallstein son sínn til fylgðar við hann; ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a255.16>héldo þeir vestr um haf á vit frænda Biarnar. En es Haralldr <anchor id=a255.17>konungr spurðe, at Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg hafðe haldet Bi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a255.18>Ketils son, útlaga konungs, þá g&oelig;rðe hann menn til hans, ok <anchor id=a255.19>boðaðe hann<note place=apparatus id=an255.7><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>boð. hann]</ab> boð. honom, B. B; fara útlagan, Cd.</note> af l&aolig;ndom, ok bað hann fara skyldo útlaga sem <anchor id=a255.20>Bi&aolig;rn vin hans, nema hann kome á konungs fund, ok láte hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a255.21>einn skapa ok skera þeirra í miðlom<note place=apparatus id=an255.8><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok ... miðlom]</ab> B; ok legge allt sitt mál á hans vald, Cd.</note>.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a255.22><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þat vas tio vetrom síðarr an Ingolfr Arnar son hafðe faret at <anchor id=a256.1><pb id=pb256 n=256>byggja Ísland, ok vas sú ferð all-fræg orðen, þvi at þeir menn es <anchor id=a256.2>kómo af Íslande<note place=apparatus id=an256.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Íslande]</ab> B; landeno, Cd.</note> s&aolig;gðo þar góða lannz-koste.

<p n=4.1><anchor id=a256.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg</hi> feck at blóte miklo, <anchor id=a256.4>ok geck til fréttar við Þór ást-vin sínn, hvárt hann <anchor id=a256.5>skylde sættask við konung, eða fara af lande <hi>á</hi> braut, ok leita ser<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a256.6>svá annarra forlaga. En frétten vísaðe Þórolfe til Íslannz. Ok <anchor id=a256.7>efter þat feck hann ser miket haf-skip ok bió þat til Íslannz-ferðar, <anchor id=a256.8>ok hafðe með ser skulda-lið sítt ok bú-ferle. Marger viner hans <anchor id=a256.9>réðosk til ferðar með hónom. Hann tók ofan hofet, ok hafðe <anchor id=a256.10>með ser flesta viðo, þá es þar h&aolig;fðo í veret, ok svá moldena undan<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a256.11>stallanom [þar és Þórr hafðe á seteð].

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a256.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Síðan siglðe Þórolfr í haf; ok byrjaðe hónom vel; ok fann <anchor id=a256.13>landet, ok siglðe fyr sunnan vestr um Reykja-nes; þá fell byrrenn, <anchor id=a256.14>ok s&aoacute; þeir at sk&aoacute;rosk í landet inn firðer stórer. Þórolfr kastaðe <anchor id=a256.15>þá fyr borð &aolig;ndoges-súlom sínom, þeim es staðet h&aolig;fðo í hofeno:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a256.16>þar vas Þórr skorenn á annarre<note place=apparatus id=an256.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>annarre]</ab> A, B; annan enda, B&ast; (AM. 446).</note>. Hann mælte svá fyrer, at hann <anchor id=a256.17>skylde þar byggja á Íslande sem Þórr léte þær á land koma. En <anchor id=a256.18>þegar <hi>es</hi> þær hóf frá skipeno, sveif þeim til ens vestra fiarðarens, <anchor id=a256.19>ok þótte þeim fara eige v&aoacute;no seinna. Efter þat kom haf-gula; <anchor id=a256.20>siglðo þeir þá vestr fyr Snæfellz-nes<note place=apparatus id=an256.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Sniófellz-, Cd.</note>, ok inn á fi&aolig;rðenn. Þeir siá,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a256.21>at fi&aolig;rðrenn es ákaflega breiðr ok langr, ok miok stór-fi&aolig;llótt <anchor id=a256.22>hv&aoacute;rom-tveggja megen.  Þórolfr gaf nafn firðenom, ok kallaðe <anchor id=a257.1><pb id=pb257 n=257>Breiða-fi&aolig;rð. Hann tók land fyr sunnan fi&aolig;rðenn, nær miðjom, <anchor id=a257.2>ok lagðe skipet á vág þann es þeir k&aolig;lloðo Hofs-vág<note place=apparatus id=an257.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Þórsvág, B.</note> síðan.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a257.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Efter þat k&aolig;nnoðo þeir landet, ok fundo á neseno<note place=apparatus id=an257.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> B; nese, Cd.</note> því <anchor id=a257.4>framan-verðo, es vas fyr norðan vágenn, at Þórr vas á land komenn <anchor id=a257.5>með súlornar.&mdash;Þat vas síðan kallat Þórs-nes.&mdash;Efter þat fór Þórolfr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a257.6>elde um land-nám sítt, útan frá Staf-&aoacute;, ok inn til þeirrar ár, es <anchor id=a257.7>hann kallaðe Þórs-&aoacute;, ok bygðe þar skip-verjom sínom. Hann <anchor id=a257.8>sette b&oeacute; mikenn við Hofs-vág, es hann kallaðe á Hofs-st&aolig;ðom. <anchor id=a257.9>Þar lét hann reisa hof, ok vas þat miket hús: vóro dyrr ... [see <anchor id=a257.10>Bk. II. § 2].<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a257.11><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórolfr kallaðe Þórs-nes miðle Vigra-fiarðar ok Hofs-vágs. <anchor id=a257.12>Í því nese<note place=apparatus id=an257.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> í miðjo neseno, B.</note> stendr eitt fiall: á því fialle hafðe Þórolfr svá mikenn <anchor id=a257.13>átrúnað, at þangat skylde enge maðr óþvegenn líta, ok &oelig;ngo <anchor id=a257.14>skylde tortíma í fialleno, hvárke fé né m&aolig;nnom, nema sialft genge <anchor id=a257.15>í braut.&mdash;Þat fiall kallaðe hann Helga-fell; ok trúðe, at hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a257.16>m&oelig;nde þangat deyja í fiallet, ok aller frændr hans.<note place=apparatus id=an257.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> B; at þat m. þ. fara þá er hann d&oelig;e ok aller á neseno hans frændr, Cd.</note>

<p n=4.5><anchor id=a257.17><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þar á neseno, sem Þórr hafðe á land komet,<note place=apparatus id=an257.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þar ... komet]</ab> B; sem Þórr hafðe á l. k. a tanganom nessens, A.</note> lét hann hafa <anchor id=a257.18>dóma alla, ok sette þar héraðs-þing. Þar vas ok svá mikell helge-staðr, <anchor id=a257.19>at hann vilde með &oelig;ngo móte láta saurga v&aolig;llenn, hvárke í <anchor id=a257.20>heiftar-blóðe, ok eige skylde þar alf-rek ganga,&mdash;ok vas haft til þess<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a257.21>sker eitt es Drit-sker vas kallat.

<pb id=pb258 n=258><p n=4.6><anchor id=a258.1><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þórolfr g&oelig;rðesk rausnar-maðr mikell í bue síno, ok hafðe <anchor id=a258.2>fiol-mennt með ser, þvi at þá vas gott matar at afla af eyjom<note place=apparatus id=an258.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> read eggjom?</note> ok <hi>af</hi> <anchor id=a258.3>&aolig;ðro sió-fange.

<p n=5.1><anchor id=a258.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Nú skal segja frá Birne, Ketils syne Flatnefs: at hann <anchor id=a258.5>siglðe vestr um haf þá es þeir Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a258.6>skilðo, sem fyrr seger. Hann hélt til Suðreyja. En es hann kom <anchor id=a258.7>vestr um haf, þá vas andaðr Ketell, faðer hans: en hann fann þar <anchor id=a258.8>Helga bróðor sínn ok systr sínar, ok buðo þau hónom góða koste <anchor id=a258.9>með ser.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a258.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Bi&aolig;rn varð þess víss, at þau h&aolig;fðo &aolig;ll saman<note place=apparatus id=an258.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&aolig;ll s.]</ab> add. B.</note> annan átrúnað,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a258.11>ok þótte hónom þat lítil-mannligt, es þau h&aolig;fðo hafnat fornom sið <anchor id=a258.12>þeim es frændr þeirra h&aolig;fðo haft: ok nam hann þar eige ynðe, ok <anchor id=a258.13>enga stað-festo vilde hann þar taka; vas hann þó um vetrenn með <anchor id=a258.14>Auðe systor sínne ok Þórsteine syne hennar. En es þau fundo, at <anchor id=a258.15>hann vilde eige &oelig;ðlask<note place=apparatus id=an258.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> auðlaz, Cd.; aulydaz, B.</note> við frændr sína, þá k&aolig;lloðo þau hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a258.16>Bi&aolig;rn enn Austr&oeacute;na, ok þótte þeim ílla es hann vilde eige þar <anchor id=a258.17>stað-festask.

<p n=6.1><anchor id=a258.18><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Biorn</hi> vas tvá vettr í Suðreyjom áðr hann bió ferð sína <anchor id=a258.19>til Íslannz. Með hónom vas í ferð Hallsteinn Þórolfs&shy;son. <anchor id=a258.20>Þeir tóko land í Breiða-firðe, ok nam Bi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an258.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Bi&aolig;rn]</ab> B; om. A. utan, B (badly).</note> land út frá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a258.21>Staf-&aoacute;, miðle ok Hrauns-fiarðar, með ráðe Þórolfs. Bi&aolig;rn bió í <anchor id=a258.22>Borgar-holte í Bi&aolig;rnar-h&aolig;fn; hann vas et mesta g&aolig;fog-menne.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a258.23><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hallsteine Þórolfs syne þótte lítil-mannligt at þiggja land at <anchor id=a259.1><pb id=pb259 n=259>f&aolig;ðor sínom; ok fór hann vestr yfer Breiða-fi&aolig;rð, ok nam þar <anchor id=a259.2>land, ok bió á Hallsteins-nese.

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a259.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Nockorom vettrom síðarr kom út Auðr en Diúp-auðga, ok <anchor id=a259.4>vas enn fyrsta vetr með Birne bróðor sínom. Síðan nam hon &aolig;ll <anchor id=a259.5>Dala-l&aolig;nd<note place=apparatus id=an259.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> &aolig;ll Dalalond, B.</note> í Breiða-firðe, í miðle Skraumu-hlaups-ár ok D&aolig;gorðar-ár,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a259.6>ok bió í Hvamme.

<p n=6.4><anchor id=a259.7><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Á þessom tímom bygðesk allr Breiða-fi&aolig;rðr, ok þarf her eige <anchor id=a259.8>at segja frá þeirra manna land-n&aoacute;mom es eige koma við þessa <anchor id=a259.9>s&aolig;go.

<p n=7.1><anchor id=a259.10><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Geirr&oelig;ðr</hi> hét maðr, es nam land inn frá Þórs-&aoacute; til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a259.11>Langa-dals<note place=apparatus id=an259.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Thus A, B; Langa-dals ár, Landn.</note>, ok bió á Eyre. Með hónom kom út <anchor id=a259.12>Ulfarr Kappe, es hann gaf land um<hi>b</hi>-hverfiss Ulfars-fell: ok Finn&shy;geirr, <anchor id=a259.13>son Þórsteins Ondors, hann bió í Alfta-firðe. Hans sonr vas <anchor id=a259.14>Þórfinnr, faðer Þórbrannz í Alfta-firðe.

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a259.15><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Vestarr hét maðr, son Þórolfs Bloðro-skalla; hann kom til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a259.16>Íslannz með f&aolig;ðor sínn gamlan, ok nam land fyr innan Urthvala-fi&aolig;rð<note place=apparatus id=an259.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> I.e. Orkn-hvala-; Hvala-f., B; Uthvala-f., M.</note>, <anchor id=a259.17>ok bió á Ondorðre-eyre: hans sonr vas Ásgeirr es þar bió <anchor id=a259.18>síðan.

<p n=7.3><anchor id=a259.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Bi&aolig;rn enn Austr&oeacute;ne andaðesk fyrst þessa landnáms-manna, ok <anchor id=a259.20>vas heygðr við Borgar-l&oeacute;k. Hann átte efter tvá sono: annarr vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a259.21>Ceallacr (enn) Gamle, es bió í Biarnar-h&aolig;fn efter f&aolig;ðor sínn: <anchor id=a259.22>Ceallacr átte Ástríðe dóttor Hrólfs hersess, systor Steinolfs ens <anchor id=a259.23>Lága. Þau &aoacute;tto þriú b&aolig;rn: Þórgrímr Goðe vas sonr þeirra, ok <anchor id=a259.24>Gerðr dótter, es átte Þórmoðr Goðe, son Oddz ens Racka. Þriðja <anchor id=a260.1><pb id=pb260 n=260>vas Helga, es átte Ásgeirr á Eyre.&mdash;Frá b&aolig;rnom Ceallacs es komen <anchor id=a260.2>mikel ætt, ok ero þat kallaðer Ceallekingar. Óttarr hét annarr <anchor id=a260.3>sonr Biarnar; hann átte Gró Geirleifs dóttor, systor Oddleifs af <anchor id=a260.4>Barða-str&aolig;nd: þeirra syner vóro þeir Helge, faðer Osvifrs ens <anchor id=a260.5>Spaka; ok Bi&aolig;rn, faðer Vígfúss í Dr&aoacute;po-hlíð; Vilgeirr hét enn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a260.6>þriðe son Óttars Biarnar sonar.

<p n=7.4><anchor id=a260.7><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg kvángaðesk í elle sínne, ok feck þeirrar <anchor id=a260.8>kono es Uðr<note place=apparatus id=an260.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> B; Unnr, Cd.</note> hét; segja sumer at hon være dótter Þórsteins Rauðs; <anchor id=a260.9>en Are Þórgils son enn Fróðe telr hána eige með hans b&aolig;rnom. <anchor id=a260.10>Þau Þórolfr ok Uðr &aoacute;tto son es Steinn hét. Þann svein gaf Þórolfr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a260.11>Þór vin sínom, ok kallaðe hann Þór-stein; ok vas þesse sveinn <anchor id=a260.12>all-bráð-g&oelig;rr.

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a260.13><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hallsteinn Þórolfs son feck Oskar, dóttor Þórsteins Rauðs: <anchor id=a260.14>Þórsteinn hét son þeirra; hann fóstraðe Þórolfr, ok kallaðe Þórstein <anchor id=a260.15>Surt: en sínn son kallaðe hann Þórstein Þorska-bít<note place=apparatus id=an260.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> homoiotel. in B, &lsquo;kall, Þorst.&rsquo;</note>.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=8.1><anchor id=a260.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Í þenna tíma kom út Geirríðr syster Geirr&oelig;ðar í Eyre, <anchor id=a260.17>ok gaf hann henne bústað í Borgar-dale fyr innan <anchor id=a260.18>Alfta-fi&aolig;rð. Hon lét setja skála sínn á þióð-braut þvera, ok skyldo <anchor id=a260.19>aller menn ríða þar í g&oelig;gnom: þar stóð iamnan borð ok matr á, <anchor id=a260.20>gefenn hverjom es hafa vilde. Af slíko þótte hon et mesta<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a260.21>g&aolig;fog-menne<note place=apparatus id=an260.3><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> B; -kvende, Cd.</note>.

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a260.22><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Geirríðe hafðe átta Bi&aolig;rn son Bolverks Blindinga-trióno, ok <anchor id=a260.23>hét þeirra son Þórolfr; hann vas víkingr mikell. Hann kom út <anchor id=a260.24>n&oelig;ckoro síðarr an móðer hans, ok vas með henne enn fyrsta vettr. <anchor id=a260.25>Þórolfe þótte þat líteð bú-land, ok skoraðe á Ulfar Kappa til landa,<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a260.26>ok bauð hónum holm-g&aolig;ngo, þvi at hann vas við aldr ok barn-lauss. <anchor id=a260.27>Ulfarr vilde heldr deyja an vesa kúgaðr af Þórolfe. Þeir <anchor id=a260.28>gengo á holm í Alfta-firðe, ok fell Ulfarr, en Þórolfr varð sárr <anchor id=a260.29>á f&oeacute;te ok geck iamnan haltr síðan&mdash;af þesso vas hann kallaðr <anchor id=a260.30>B&oeacute;ge-fótr.<note place=apparatus id=an260.4><ab type=lineNumRef>29.</ab> ok er hann lenge við þessa sogo, ok sialdan við gott kendr, sem síðarr mun sagt verða, add. B (309).</note> Hann g&oelig;rðe bú í Hvamme í Þórsár-dale; hann tók<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a260.31>l&aolig;nd efter Ulfar, ok vas enn meste óiafnaðar-maðr. Hann selðe <anchor id=a260.32>l&aolig;nd leysingjom Þórbrannz í Alfta-firðe, Ulfare Ulfars-fell, en <anchor id=a260.33>&OElig;rlyge &OElig;rlygs-staðe, ok bioggo þeir þar lenge síðan.

<pb id=pb261 n=261><p n=8.3><anchor id=a261.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórolfr B&oeacute;ge-fótr átte þriú b&aolig;rn. Arnkell hét son hans, en <anchor id=a261.2>Gunnfríðr dótter, es átte Þorbeiner á Þorbeinis st&aolig;ðom inn á Vatz-halse.<note place=apparatus id=an261.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> á Vaz-halse inn frá brecku frá Drápuhlíð, B.</note> <anchor id=a261.3>Þeirra syner vóro þeir Sigmundr ok Þórgils; en hans dótter <anchor id=a261.4>vas Þórgerðr, es átte Vígfúss í Dr&aoacute;po-hlíð. Onnor dótter Þórolfs <anchor id=a261.5>B&oeacute;ge-fótz hét Geirríðr, es átte Þórolfr, son Herjolfs H&oelig;lkin-raza,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a261.6>ok bioggo þau í Máva-hlíð: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro þau Þórarenn Svarte, <anchor id=a261.7>ok Goðný.

<p n=9.1><anchor id=a261.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg</hi> andaðesk á Hof-st&aolig;ðom: <anchor id=a261.9>þá tók Þórsteinn Þorska-bítr f&aolig;ðor-leifð <anchor id=a261.10>sína: hann geck at eiga Þóro, dóttor Óláfs Feilans, systor Þórðar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a261.11>Gelliss, es þá bió í Hvamme. Þórolfr vas heygðr í Haugs-nese út <anchor id=a261.12>frá Hof-st&aolig;ðom.

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a261.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Í þenna tíma vas svá mikell ofse Ceallekinga, at þeir þóttosk <anchor id=a261.14>fyre &aolig;ðrom m&aolig;nnom þar í sveit: vóro þeir ok svá marger ætt-menn <anchor id=a261.15>Biarnar, at einge frænda-b&aolig;lkr vas þá iam-mikell í Breiða-firðe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a261.16>Þá bió Barna-Ceallacr, frænde þeirra, á Meðalfellz-str&aolig;nd <anchor id=a261.17>þar sem nú heiter á Ceallacs-st&aolig;ðom; hann átte marga sono ok <anchor id=a261.18>vel menta; þeir veitto aller frændom sínom fyr sunnan fi&aolig;rðenn <anchor id=a261.19>á þingom ok mann-fundom.

<p n=9.3><anchor id=a261.20><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þat vas eitt vár á Þórsness-þinge, at þeir mágar, Þórgrímr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a261.21>Ceallacs son ok Ásgeirr á Eyre, g&oelig;rðo orð á, at þeir m&oelig;nde eige <anchor id=a261.22>leggja drag under of-metnað Þórsnesinga í því<note place=apparatus id=an261.2><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> B; ok þat at þeir mundi ganga þar &oelig;. sínna sem a. á mannf. á grase, A.</note>, at þeir m&oelig;nde eige <anchor id=a261.23>ganga &oelig;rna sínna þar á grase sem annars-staðar á mann-fundom, <anchor id=a261.24>þó þeir være svá stollz, at þeir g&oelig;rðe l&aolig;nd sín helgare an aðrar <anchor id=a261.25>iarðer í Breiða-firðe. Lýsto þeir þá yfir því, at þeir m&oelig;nde eige<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a261.26>troða skó til at ganga þar í út-sker til alf-reka. En es Þórsteinn <anchor id=a262.1><pb id=pb262 n=262>Þorska-bítr varð þessa varr, vilde hann eige þola, at þeir saurgaðe <anchor id=a262.2>þann v&aolig;ll, es Þórolfr, faðer hans, hafðe tignat um framm aðra <anchor id=a262.3>staðe í sínne land-eign: heimte hann þá at ser vine sína, ok ætlaðe <anchor id=a262.4>at verja þeim víge v&aolig;llenn, ef þeir hygðesk at saurga hann. At <anchor id=a262.5>þesso ráðe hurfo með hónom, Þórgeirr Cengr<note place=apparatus id=an262.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Cengr]</ab> add. B.</note> son Girr&oelig;ðar á<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a262.6>Eyre; ok Alftfirðingar, Þórfinnr ok Þórbrandr son hans<note place=apparatus id=an262.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>son hans]</ab> ok ss. hans, B.</note>; Þórolfr <anchor id=a262.7>B&oeacute;ge-fótr; ok marger aðrer þing-menn Þórsteins ok viner. En <anchor id=a262.8>um kveldet es Ceallekingar vóro metter, tóko þeir v&aoacute;pn sín, ok <anchor id=a262.9>gengo út í neset. En es þeir Þórsteinn s&aoacute;, at þeir menn sn&oelig;ro af <anchor id=a262.10>þeim veg es til skersens lá, þá hliópo þeir til vápna, ok runno efter<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a262.11>þeim með ópe ok eggjan. Ok es Ceallekingar s&aoacute; þat, hliópo þeir <anchor id=a262.12>saman ok v&aoacute;rðo sik; en Þórsnesingar g&oelig;rðo svá harða at-g&aolig;ngo, <anchor id=a262.13>at Ceallekingar hrucko af vellenom, ok í fi&aolig;rona; sn&oelig;rosk þeir þá <anchor id=a262.14>við, ok varð þar enn harðaste bardaga<note place=apparatus id=an262.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> en harðasta atlaga, B.</note> með þeim. Ceallekingar <anchor id=a262.15>vóro fære, ok h&aolig;fðo ein-vala lið. Nú verða við varer Skógstrendingar,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a262.16>Þórgestr enn Gamle ok Áslákr or Langa-dale; þeir hliópo <anchor id=a262.17>til ok gengo í miðle; en hvárer-tveggjo vóro ener óðosto; ok <anchor id=a262.18>fengo eige skilt þá, áðr an þeir héto at veita þeim, es þeirra orð <anchor id=a262.19>vilde heyra til skilnaðarens. Ok við þat urðo þeir skilðer; ok þó <anchor id=a262.20>með því móte, at Ceallekingar n&aoacute;ðo eige at ganga upp á v&aolig;llenn;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a262.21>ok stigo þeir á skip, ok fóro braut af þingeno. Þar fello menn <anchor id=a262.22>af hv&aoacute;rom-tveggjom, ok fleire af Ceallekingom; en fiolðe varð <anchor id=a262.23>sárr. Griðom varð &oelig;ngom á komet, þvi at hváreger vildo þau selja; <anchor id=a263.1><pb id=pb263 n=263>ok héto hvárer &aolig;ðrom at-f&aolig;rom, þegar <hi>es</hi> því mætte við koma. <anchor id=a263.2>V&aolig;llrenn vas orðenn al-blóðegr, þar es þeir b&aolig;rðosk, ok svá þar <anchor id=a263.3>es Skóg-strendingar<note place=apparatus id=an263.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Skóg-str.]</ab> emend.; Þórsnesingar, A, B.</note> stóðo meðan barzk vas.

<p n=10.1><anchor id=a263.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> Efter þinget h&aolig;fðo hvárer-tveggjo setor fiol-mennar, <anchor id=a263.5>ok vóro þá dylgjor miklar með þeim. Viner þeirra<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a263.6>tóko þat ráð, at senda efter Þórðe Gelle, es þá vas mestr h&aolig;fðinge <anchor id=a263.7>í Breiða-firðe: hann vas frænde Ceallekinga, en ná-mágr Þórsteins; <anchor id=a263.8>þótte hann glíkastr til at sætta þá. En es Þórðe kom þesse orð&shy;sending, <anchor id=a263.9>fór hann til við marga menn ok leitar um sætter; fann <anchor id=a263.10>hann, at stórum langt<note place=apparatus id=an263.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> B; stórlangt, Cd.</note> vas á miðlom þeirra þyckjo; en þó feck<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a263.11>hann komet á griðom með þeim ok stefno-lage. Þar urðo þær <anchor id=a263.12>mála-lykðer, at Þórðr skylde g&oelig;ra um, með því móte, at Ceallekingar <anchor id=a263.13>skilðo þat til<note place=apparatus id=an263.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> B; homoiotel. in A, en Ceall. Þ. skilde þat til.</note>, at þeir mundo alldrige ganga í Drit-sker &oelig;rna <anchor id=a263.14>sínna: en Þórsteinn skoraðe þat í, at Ceallekingar skyldo eige <anchor id=a263.15>saurga v&aolig;llenn nú heldr an fyr. Ceallekingar k&aolig;lloðo alla þá hafa<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a263.16>fallet óhelga, es fyre Þórsteine h&aolig;fðo fallet, fyrer þat es þeir h&aolig;fðo <anchor id=a263.17>fyrr með þann hug at þeim faret at berjask. En Þórsnesingar <anchor id=a263.18>s&aolig;gdo Ceallekinga alla óhelga fyre laga-brot þat es þeir g&oelig;rðo <anchor id=a263.19>á helgoðo þinge. En þó at vandlega være under skilt g&oelig;rðena, þá <anchor id=a263.20>iáttaðe Þórðr at g&oelig;ra, ok vilde heldr þat, an þeir skilðe ósátter.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb264 n=264><p n=10.2><anchor id=a264.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þórðr hafðe þat upp-haf g&oelig;rðarennar, at hann kallar, at sá <anchor id=a264.2>skal hafa happ es hloteð hefer; kvað þar enge víg b&oeacute;ta skolo, þau <anchor id=a264.3>es orðet h&aolig;fðo í Þórsnese, eðr áverka; en v&aolig;llenn kallar hann <anchor id=a264.4>spiltan af heiftar-blóðe es niðr hafðe komet, ok kallar þá i&aolig;rð nú <anchor id=a264.5>eige helgare an aðra; ok kallar þá því valda, es fyrre g&oelig;rðosk til<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a264.6>áverka við aðra. Kallaðe hann þat frið-brot frameð<note place=apparatus id=an264.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þat fr. fr.]</ab> B; eitt friðbrot verit hafa, Cd.</note>. Sagðe þar <anchor id=a264.7>ok eige þing skyldo vesa síðan.

<p n=10.3><anchor id=a264.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En til þess, at þeir være vel sátter ok viner þaðan af, þá <anchor id=a264.9>g&oelig;rðe hann þat, at Þórgrímr Ceallaks son skylde halda upp hofeno <anchor id=a264.10>at helminge, ok hafa halfan hof-toll, ok svá þing-menn at helminge;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a264.11>veita ok Þórsteine til allra mála þaðan af, ok styrkja hann til, <anchor id=a264.12>hverega helge sem hann vill á leggja þinget þar sem næst verðe <anchor id=a264.13>sett. Her með gifte Þórðr Geller Þórgríme Ceallaks syne Þórhilde<note place=apparatus id=an264.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Her með g. Þórðr dóttor sína Þórgríme (!), B.</note> <anchor id=a264.14>frænd-kono sína, dóttor Þórkels Meinakrs nábua sína. Vas hann <anchor id=a264.15>af því kallaðr Þórgrímr Goðe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=10.4><anchor id=a264.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þeir f&oeacute;rðo þá þinget inn í neset þar sem nú es.<note place=apparatus id=an264.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> þingit þar sem næstum var sett, ok stendr þar enn, B.</note> Ok þá es <anchor id=a264.17>Þórðr Gellir skipaðe fiórðunga-þing, lét hann þar vesa fiórðungs-þing <anchor id=a264.18>Vestfirðinga: skyldo menn þangat til s&oeacute;kja um alla Vest&shy;fi&aolig;rðo<note place=apparatus id=an264.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>um a. Vestf.]</ab>, or ollom Vestfirðinga fiórðunge, B.</note>: <anchor id=a264.19>þar sér enn dóm-hríng þann es menn vóro d&oeacute;mðer í til <anchor id=a264.20>blótz.<note place=apparatus id=an264.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> skulu menn þar á þinginn setja domhring (!), B.</note> Í þeim hring stendr Þórs-steinn es þeir menn vóro brotner<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a264.21>um es til blóta vóro hafðer; ok sér enn blóðs-litenn á steinenom. <anchor id=a265.1><pb id=pb265 n=265>Vas á því þinge enn enn meste helge-staðr; en eige vas m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a265.2>þar bannat at ganga &oelig;rna sínna þar á grase sem vilde<note place=apparatus id=an265.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þar á gr. s. v.]</ab> add. B.</note>.

<p n=11.1><anchor id=a265.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þórsteinn Þorska-bítr</hi> g&oelig;rðesk enn meste <anchor id=a265.4>rausnar-maðr; hann hafðe með ser iamnan sex tige <anchor id=a265.5>frelsingja; hann vas mikell at-drátta-maðr, ok vas iamnan í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a265.6>fiske-róðrom.

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a265.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann lét fyrst reisa b&oeacute;enn at Helga-felle, ok f&oeacute;rðe þangat <anchor id=a265.8>bú sítt, ok vas þar enn meste h&aolig;foð-staðr<note place=apparatus id=an265.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> hofstaðr, Cd.; hofuð-bær, B.</note> í þat mund. Hann lét <anchor id=a265.9>ok b&oeacute; g&oelig;ra þar í neseno, nær því<note place=apparatus id=an265.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>nær því]</ab> om. B.</note> sem þinget hafðe veret<note place=apparatus id=an265.4><ab type=textRef>veret]</ab> here one leaf is missing in B (309).</note>. Þann <anchor id=a265.10>b&oeacute; lét hann ok miok vanda, ok gaf hann síðan Þórsteine Surt<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a265.11>frænda sínum: bió hann þar síðan, ok varð enn meste spekingr at <anchor id=a265.12>vite. Þórsteinn Þorska-bítr átte son es kallaðr vas Borkr enn Digre.

<p n=11.3><anchor id=a265.13><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En sumar þat es Þórsteinn vas half-þrít&oelig;gr, f&oeacute;dde Þóra svein-barn, <anchor id=a265.14>ok vas Grímr nefnðr, es vatne vas ausenn: þann svein gaf Þórsteinn <anchor id=a265.15>Þór, ok kvað vesa skyldo hof-goða, ok kallar hann Þórgrím.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=11.4><anchor id=a265.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þat sama haust fór Þórsteinn út í H&aolig;scullz-ey til fangs. <anchor id=a265.17>Þat vas eitt kveld um hausteð, at sauða-maðr Þórsteins fór at <anchor id=a265.18>fé fyr norðan Helga-fell: hann sá, at fiallet lauksk upp norðan; <anchor id=a265.19>hann sá inn í fiallet elda stóra, ok heyrðe hann þangat mikenn <anchor id=a265.20>glaum ok horna-skvol: ok es hann hlýdde ef hann næme n&oelig;ckor<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a265.21>orða-skil, heyrðe hann at þar vas heilsat Þórsteine Þorska-bít ok <anchor id=a265.22>f&aolig;ro-nautom hans, ok mælt, at hann skal sitja í &aolig;ndoge gegnt feðr <anchor id=a265.23>sínom. Þenna fyreburð sagðe sauða-maðr Þóro, kono Þórsteins, <anchor id=a266.1><pb id=pb266 n=266>um kveldet. Hon lét ser fátt um finnask, ok kallar vesa mega, at <anchor id=a266.2>þetta være fyre-boðan st&oeacute;rre tíðenda. Um morgonenn efter kómo <anchor id=a266.3>menn útan or H&aolig;scullz-ey, ok s&aolig;gðo þau tíðende, at Þórsteinn <anchor id=a266.4>Þorska-bítr hofðe drucknat í fiske-róðre; ok þótte m&aolig;nnom þat <anchor id=a266.5>mikell skaðe. Þóra hélt þar bú efter, ok ræzk sá maðr til með<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a266.6>henne es Hallvarðr hét. Þau &aoacute;tto son es Márr hét.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 lang=en-UK id=en.thorness rend="display(none)">

<!-- TRANSLATIONS OF THE THORSNESS SETTLEMENT. -->

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil Flat-neb</hi> was the name of a noble lord <hi>or</hi> herse in Norway. He was the son of Beorn Buna, son of Grim herse <hi>or</hi> lord of <pb id=pb253a n=253>Sogn. Cetil Flat-neb was married. He had to wife Yngw-hild, daughter of Cetil Wether, herse <hi>or</hi> lord of Rauma-ric. Beorn and Helge were their sons&apos; names, and their daughters were these: Aud the Deep-rich, Thor-und Hyrna, and Ior-wen Mann-wits-brecca. Beorn, the son of Cetil, was fostered in the east in Iamta-land [?] with a certain earl, whose name was Ceallac, a wise man and noble. The earl had a son named Beorn, and his daughter&apos;s name was Giav-laug [Geibhleach].

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> It came to pass at that time that king Harold Fairhair came to the kingdom of Norway. Because of the unpeace <hi>or</hi> civil war many well-born men fled from their heritages out of Norway, some eastward over the Keel, some west over the Sea [North Sea]. There were some that used to keep themselves of a winter in the Southreys [Sodor Isles] or Orkneys, and of a summer they would harry in Norway, and do much harm in Harold&apos;s kingdom. The franklins brought the matter before the king, and prayed him to free them from this unpeace <hi>or</hi> civil war. Then king Harold decided to fit out a host to go west over the Sea, saying that Cetil Flat-neb should be captain of this host. Cetil excused himself, but the king said he must go. And when Cetil saw that the king would have his way, he made ready for the journey, and took with him his wife and all those of his children who were still with him.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And when Cetil came to the west over the Sea, he had certain battles there, and ever he won the day. He conquered the Southreys and made himself chief over them. Moreover he made peace and covenants with the greatest chiefs west of the Sea, and entered in the bonds of affinity, and sent his host back eastward again. And when they came <pb id=pb254a n=254>before king Harold they said that Cetil Flat-neb was a chief in the Southreys, but they said they could not see that it would much forward king Harold&apos;s rule west of the Sea. And when the king heard this, then he took to himself all the property that Cetil owned in Norway.

<p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Cetil Flat-neb gave Aud his daughter in marriage to Olaf the White, the greatest king-of-a-host west over the Sea. He was the son of Ingi-ald, Helge&apos;s son, and Ingi-ald&apos;s mother was Thora, daughter of Sigurd Snake i&apos; the Eye, son of Ragn-here Lod-broc. Thor-wen Hyrna he gave to Helge the Thin, the son of Ey-wind East-man, and of Rafurta, daughter of Cearval, the king of the Irish.

<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn</hi>, son of Cetil Flat-neb, was in Iamta-land [?] till earl Ceallac died. He took to wife Giav-laug [Geibhleach], the earl&apos;s daughter, and then went from the east over the Keel first to Thrond-ham, and then southwards and took possession of the property which his father had had, and drove away the reeves whom king Harold had set over it.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> When he heard news of this, king Harold was in the Wick, and he went by the upper road [by land] northward to Thrond-ham, and when he was come to Thrond-ham he summoned the Eight-folk-moot; and at that moot he made Beorn, Cetil&apos;s son, an outlaw in Norway, making him a man to be killed or taken wherever he was found. Moreover he sent Hawk High-breech and other of his champions to slay him if they could meet with him. And when they were come south of Staad [Cape Stadt], Beorn&apos;s friends were ware of their journeying and gave him <pb id=pb255a n=255>news thereof. Then Beorn ran to a galley that he had, with his household and chattels, and went off southward along the land, for it was then the depth of winter, and he did not dare to put to sea.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Beorn went on till he came to the island that is called Mostr, which lies off South Horda-land, and there a man received him whose name was Thor-wolf, the son of Erne-wolf Fish-driver [the whale fisher]. Beorn was there through the winter in hiding. The king&apos;s men turned back when they had taken order for Beorn&apos;s property and set men to keep it.

<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf</hi> was a great chief, and kept up the greatest estate. He kept the Temple of Thunder there in the island, and was a great friend of Thunder, wherefore he was called Thor-wolf. He was a big man and strong, fair to look on, and he had a big beard, wherefore he was called Mostr-beardie. He was the best-born man in the island.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> In the spring Thor-wolf gave Beorn a good war-ship and manned it with a good crew, and gave him his son Hall-stan to be with him on the way; and they put to sea, going west to make for Beorn&apos;s kinsmen. But when king Harold heard that Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie had kept Beorn, Cetil&apos;s son, the king&apos;s outlaw, he sent his command to him to forbid him the land, bidding him go into exile like Beorn his friend, unless he would come and seek the king, and submit the whole case to his ruling.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> That was ten winters after Ing-wolf Erneson had gone to settle Iceland. And this journey of his was become widely reported, because <pb id=pb256a n=256>the men who came from Iceland said that there was a good choice of land there.

<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie</hi> made ready a great sacrifice, and went in and sought an oracle of Thunder, his beloved friend, whether he should make terms with the king, or leave the country and seek him another career. But the oracle directed Thor-wolf to Iceland. And after that he got himself a great sea-ship, and fitted her out for the Iceland voyage, and took aboard with him his household and his chattels. Many of his friends ventured on the voyage with him. He took down the temple, and most of the timber that had been in it he took with him, and also the earth under the altar<note n=1 id=n256.1>MS. on which Thunder had his seat.</note>.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Then Thor-wolf sailed to sea, and had fair winds, and made the land, and sailed up along the south-westward round Reek-ness. Then the fair wind fell, and they could see that the land was cut into deep friths. Then Thor-wolf cast overboard his porch-pillars that had stood in the temple (Thunder was carven upon one of them); and as he did so, he declared that he would settle in Iceland at the place where Thunder let them come on shore. And immediately they drifted from the ship, and swept into the west of the bay, and they seemed to go faster than could be looked for. After that the sea breeze came up, and they sailed west round Snow-fell-ness, and in up the frith. They could see that the frith was wonderfully broad and deep, and very full of high fells on both sides. Thor-wolf gave the frith a name, and called <pb id=pb257a n=257>it Broad-frith. He neared the land on the south of the frith near the middle, and put the ship into the bay that they afterwards called Temple-bay.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> After that they explored the land, and upon the uttermost part of the point, that is on the north of the bay, they found that Thunder was come ashore with the pillars. It was afterwards called Thor&apos;s-ness. After that Thor-wolf bore the fire round his settlement, starting inward from Staff-water, and landward to the water which he called Thor&apos;s-water, and he gave settlements to his mariners there. He set up a homestead on Temple-bay, which he called Temple-stead. He set up a temple there, and it was a big house.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Thor-wolf called [all] between Wigre-frith and Temple-bay Thor&apos;s-ness. On this ness there stands a hill. This hill Thor-wolf had in such great reverence that no man might look thereon [pray towards it] unwashen, and there might be no destruction of anything, man or beast, on this hill, save the creature come off it of its own accord. This hill he called Holy-fell, and he believed that he should go into it when he died and all his kinsmen on the ness.

<p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> On the ness, where Thunder had come ashore, he had all the courts held, and set the hered-moot. There was such a sanctuary there also, that he would by no means let the field be befouled withal, neither with feud-blood [blood shed in anger], and there might be no elf-drive [excrement] passed there, but for this purpose there was a reef appointed which was called Dirt-reef.

<pb id=pb258a n=258><p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Thor-wolf set up the greatest estate in his homestead, and kept a great household about him; for there was then good meat in plenty to be got from the eggs [MS. islands] and other gettings from the sea.

<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Now it is right to take up the tale of Beorn Cetil, Flat-neb&apos;s son&mdash;how he sailed westward over sea, what time he and Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie parted, as was said before. He made for the Southreys. But when he was come west over sea his father Cetil was already dead, but he found Helge his brother there and his sisters, and they offered him good terms if he would stay with them.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But Beorn found out that they had another worship, and he thought it a craven thing that they had thrown over the old way which their kinsmen had held, and he could not rest there, and would not make his abode there. Nevertheless he stayed the winter over with Aud his sister, and Thor-stan her son. But when they found that he would not make his home with his kinsfolk, then they called him Beorn the Eastron, and did like it ill that he would not make his abode there.

<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Beorn</hi> was two winters in the Southreys before he made ready for his voyage to Iceland. With him on this voyage was Hall-stan, Thor-wolf&apos;s son. They neared the land at Broad-frith, and he [Beorn] took up his settlement, beginning from the sea at Staff-water, between it and Hraun&apos;s-frith, under the counsel of Thor-wolf. Beorn dwelt in Borg-holt at Beorn&apos;s-haven. He was the best-born of men.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hall-stan, Thor-wolf&apos;s son, thought it craven to receive land from his <pb id=pb259a n=259>father, and he went westward over Broad-frith, and took up a settlement there, and dwelt at Hall-stan&apos;s-ness.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Some winters later Aud the Deep-rich came out, and the first winter she was with Beorn her brother. Afterwards she took in settlement all the Dale-lands in Broad-frith between Scream-leap&apos;s-water and Day-meal&apos;s-water, and dwelt at Hwamm.

<p n=6.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> It was in these days that all Broad-frith was settled [c. 900]. And it is no use here telling forth the settlements of them that do not come into this History.

<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gar-rod</hi> was the name of a man that took land in settlement inwards from Thor&apos;s-water to Lang-dale, and lived at Eyre. With him came out Wolf-here the Champion, to whom he gave land round about Wolf-here&apos;s-fell, and Finn-gar the son of Thor-stan Snow-skate. He [Finn-gar] dwelt at Elfet&apos;s-frith. His son was Thor-finn, father of Thor-brand o&apos; Elfet&apos;s-frith.

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> West-here was the name of a man, the son of Thor-wolf Bladder-sack. He came to Iceland with his old father, and took up a settlement inside of Urc-whale-frith [MS. Urt-whale-frith], and dwelt at Endworth-eyre. His son was As-geirr, who dwelt there afterwards.

<p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Beorn the Eastron died first of these settlers, and was put in a howe over against Borg-leak [<hi>or</hi> beck]. He left two sons behind him. One of them was Ceallac the Elder, who dwelt in Beorn&apos;s-haven after his father. [<hi>The next lines are given in Ld.</hi>, II. 8, 9, <hi>which see</hi>.]

<pb id=pb260a n=260><p n=7.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie took a wife in his old age, and married a wife whose name was Und. Some say that she was the daughter of Thor-stan the Red, but Are Thor-gils&apos;s son the historian does not reckon her with her children. Thor-wolf and Und had a son named Stan. This boy Thor-wolf dedicated to Thunder his friend and called him Thor-stan, and the boy was very quick of growth.

<p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hall-stan, Thor-wolf&apos;s son, took to wife Osc, daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Thor-stan was the name of their son. Thor-wolf fostered him and called him Thor-stan the Black, but his own son he called Thor-stan Torsk-biter [biter of codfish].

<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> At that time came out Gar-rid, sister of Gar-rod of Eyre. [<hi>For the next few lines, see Ld.</hi>, II. 11.]

<pb id=pb261a n=261><p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie</hi> died at Temple-stead, and Thor-stan Torsk-biter took his heritage. He proceeded to marry Thora, daughter of Anlaf Feilan, sister of Thord Gelle, who dwelt in Hwamm in those days. Thor-wolf was put in a howe at Howe&apos;s-ness, to the seaward of Temple-stead.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> In those days the pride of <hi rend=sc>Ceallacings</hi> was so great that they thought themselves above every one else in the neighbourhood, and there were so many of Beorn&apos;s kinsmen that there was no other kindred in Broad-frith as big. Beorn-Ciallac their kinsman then dwelt in Mid-fell-stand, at the place now called Ceallac&apos;s-stead; he had many sons, and they were of good report. They all upheld their kinsmen on the south of the frith at moots and assemblies.

<p n=9.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> It happened one spring at Thor&apos;s-ness moot that these two brothers-in-law, Thor-grim Ceallac&apos;s son, and As-gar o&apos; Eyre, declared that they would not smooth the way for the pride of the Thor&apos;s-ness-men, and that they would do their business as elsewhere at assemblies on the grass, in spite of their pride in setting up their land as more holy than any other earth in Broad-frith. They let it be known that they would not wear out their shoes in going out to the sea-reef to <hi>elf-drive</hi>. But when Thor-stan <pb id=pb262a n=262>Torsk-biter got to hear of this, he would not suffer them to befoul the field that Thor-wolf his father had honoured above all places on his estate, and he gathered to him his friends, and determined to keep the field against them by battle if they showed intent to befoul it. There took part with him in this plan Thor-geir Ceng, the son of Gar-rod o&apos; Eyre, and the Elfet&apos;s-frith-men, Thor-fin and Thor-brand his son, Thor-wolf Cripple-foot, and many other moot-men and friends of Thor-stan. And about the evening, when the Ceallacings had had their moot, they took their weapons and went out into the ness. And when Thor-stan and his men saw that they turned out of the way that lay to the reef, they sprang to their weapons, and ran after them with whoops and abuse. And when the Ceallacings saw it, they ran together and defended themselves; but the Thor&apos;s-ness-men made such a hard onslaught, that the Ceallacings gave back out of the field down to the fore-shore. There they turned again upon them, and there was the hardest battle between them. The Ceallacings were the fewer, but they had a picked company. But by this time the Shaw-strand-men got to know of it, Thor-gest the Old and Oslac o&apos; Lang-dale. They ran up and went between them, but on both sides they were as mad as could be, and they could not get them parted, till they promised to stand by the side that would hearken to their words and withdraw apart. And so they were parted, but on the condition that the Ceallacings were not able to go up into the field, and so they took ship and went away from the moots. Men fell there from both sides, but more of the Ceallacings, and there was a multitude of wounded. They could not come to <pb id=pb263a n=263>a truce, because neither of them would grant it, but each of them declared that they would attack the others directly they could come across them. The field was made very bloody when they fought, and also where the Shaw-strand-men [MS. Thor&apos;s-ness-men] stood while the battle was going on.

<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> After the moot each side kept up a great gathering, and there was at the time deadly hatred between them. Their friends took the plan of sending for Thord Gelle, who was then the greatest chief in Broad-frith. He was a kinsman of the Ceallacings, and of near kin by marriage to Thor-stan; he was thought the most likely man to make peace between them. But when Thord got their message, he went forth thither with many men behind him and sought to make peace; but he found that there was a very great difference between the two parties&apos; wishes: nevertheless he brought about a truce between them and a meeting. The end of the case was that Thord was chosen to make terms, <hi>or</hi> arbitrate on the understanding that the Ceallacings had their way in this, that they would never do their business at Dirt-skerry; and that Thor-stan stipulated that the Ceallacings should not befoul the plain any more than they had before. The Ceallacings held that all those who had fallen on Thor-stan&apos;s side had fallen in guilt, because they had first come forth against them with intent to battle. But the Thor&apos;s-ness-men said that all the Ceallacings were in guilt, because of the breach of law they committed at a hallowed moot. And though the terms on both sides were so nice, yet Thord consented to act as day&apos;s-man, for he would rather do so than that they should part without being at peace.

<pb id=pb264a n=264><p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Thord began his arbitration by saying &lsquo;he who gets the lot must have the luck&rsquo; [<hi lang=la>beati possidentes</hi>], and that there should be no boot paid for any manslaughters done at Thor&apos;s-ness, or for any assault; and he declared that the field was defiled by the feud-blood that had fallen thereon; and declared that the earth there now was no more holy than any other; and he declared that the blame lay on them who first committed the assault upon the others, and that this was a breach of the peace; and that there should no moot be held there afterwards.

<p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And further, in order that they should be in firm peace and good friends henceforward, he gave as award that Thor-grim Ceallac&apos;s son should keep up the Temple half of it, and have half the Temple-toll and also half of the moot-men; that he should further uphold Thor-stan in all suits henceforward, and give him his support whatsoever hallowing he would lay upon the new moot which was to be set up. Moreover Thord Gelle gave his kinswoman Thor-hild, a daughter of Thor-kel Mein-acre his neighbour, to Thor-grim Ceallac&apos;s son, to wife. And ever after this he was called Thor-grim the gode.

<p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Then they moved the moot up the country into the ness where it is now. And at the time when Thord Gelle created the Quarter-moots, he made this to be the Quarter-moot of the West-frith-men, and thither should men from all the West-friths seek. There is still to be seen the doom-ring wherein men were doomed to sacrifice. In this ring stands Thunder&apos;s stone, on which the men that were to be sacrificed were broken; and there is still to be seen the blood-stain on the stone. <pb id=pb265a n=265>This moot-stead was a most hallowed place, albeit men were not forbidden to do their business there on the grass as they would.

<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Torsk-biter</hi> kept up the greatest estate. He always had three-score freed-men about him. He was a great man for laying up stores, and was always out at sea fishing.

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He was the first to build the homestead at Holy-fell; and flitted his homestead there, and it was the finest of great houses at that time. He also had a homestead put up on the ness near where the moot had been before. He also took great pains with this homestead, and then he gave it to Thor-stan Swart his kinsman, who dwelt there afterwards and became a very great sage for wisdom. Thor-stan Torsk-biter had a son who was called Baurc the Fat.

<p n=11.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And the summer in which Thor-stan was twenty-five years old, Thora bare a man-child, and he was named Grim when he was sprinkled with water. Thor-stan dedicated this boy to Thor, and declared that he should be a temple priest, and called him Thor-grim.

<p n=11.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> That same harvest-tide Thor-stan went out fishing to Haus-coll&apos;s-ey. It came to pass one evening in the harvest-tide that Thor-stan&apos;s shepherd was tending his sheep on the north of Holy-fell; and he saw that the hill stood open on the north side. He could see inside in the hill great fires, and could hear a great chinking and clatter of horns there. And as he listened to try and catch some word clearly, he heard greeting given to Thor-stan Torsk-biter and his mates, and he heard it said that he was to sit in the high seat over against his father. This portent the shepherd told to Thora, Thor-stan&apos;s wife, in the evening. <pb id=pb266a n=266>She did not say much when she heard it, but considered that may-be it was a foreboding of greater news. And next morning men came ashore from Haus-coll&apos;s-ey and told these tidings, that Thor-stan Torsk-biter had been drowned a-fishing, and men thought this a sore blow. Thora kept her homestead there afterwards, and a certain man, whose name was Hall-ward, helped her [as reeve]. They had a son who was called Mar.

</div2>



<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<div1 n=4 id=s1.4>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 4.</ab> MANTISSA.</head>


<p>In John Erlendsson&apos;s copy of Hawk&apos;s-book, he breaks off at the bottom of a leaf at the end of the passage about Earl Rognwald, leaving ten leaves blank, in sign that there was a leaf or leaves missing in his original. On the other hand, calculation shows that what he has written squares with a whole leaf of Hawk&apos;s-book. But it would appear that when the book was in Biorn o&apos; Scardsa&apos;s hands, this missing leaf was still existing. It is from his compilation that we have got therefore what remained of <hi>Mantissa</hi>: AM. 104, Asgar&apos;s transcript, from an autograph of Biorn&apos;s, is the best copy, and upon this our text of chs. 3&ndash;6 is founded.

<p>The pedigrees which are here restored to Mantissa show by their reference to Hawk that they must have stood in Hawk&apos;s-book.

<p>The mistake which gave the first part of <hi>Mantissa</hi> to the end of Christni Saga, owing to the erroneous following of John Erlendsson&apos;s copy, is here for the first time corrected. Hence chs. 1&ndash;2 are here drawn from the Christni Saga transcript, with some corrections due to Biorn o&apos; Scardsa. The rest (chs. 3&ndash;6) are drawn from Biorn&apos;s copy.

<p>Chapter 1. 1 is also found inserted into Hungrvaca (<hi>h</hi>).

<p>We now think that Lawman Hawk (he or the compiler of Christni Saga) had in hand a copy of a fragment of Libellus, containing the last two chapters thereof, along with an appendix or continuation as it were, to which again are added sundry entries, partly touching Iceland, partly Norway.

<p>The name &lsquo;Mantissa&rsquo; was coined by an editor at the end of the last century. In the edition of 1688 and in Arne Magnusson&apos;s time, it is called &lsquo;Appendix.&rsquo; Chronologically it is an appendage to Libellus, though it has come down appended to a Christni Saga MS.; the contents, however, best fit Landnama-book.

<pb id=pb267 n=267><p>The original probably stood to Liber or Libellus as the Continuation does to Bæda&apos;s Church History, and like it is made up of notes and additions of annalistic character. Its contents are<corr>:</corr>&mdash;


<list>
    <item>Ch. 1. Annals, 1118&ndash;19, 1121.
    <item>Ch. 2. Chronologic note, which is partly unfinished; perhaps a leaf is lost here.
    <item>Ch. 3. On the two great Famines in Iceland.
    <item>Ch. 4. On Bearne&apos;s Hall.
    <item>Ch. 5. Pedigrees.
    <item>Ch. 6. List of early Bishops, parallel to that in Libellus.
</list>


<p>The pedigrees of ch. 5 are not all translated, as they will be found tabulated below with the other genealogies of this volume.



<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=mantissa lang=is rend="align-with(en.mantissa)">
<head>[A. D. 1118.]</head>


<p n=1.1><anchor id=a267.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Á Því áre es Gizorr byscop andaðesk, g&oelig;rðe hallære <anchor id=a267.2>miket á Íslande. Þá kom hríð sú á Dymbil-d&aolig;gom, <anchor id=a267.3>at menn m&aoacute;tto eige veita tíðer í kirkjom í sumom heroðom fyr <anchor id=a267.4>norðan land. En F&aolig;sto-dag enn Langa þá hóf upp kn&aolig;rr under <anchor id=a267.5>Eyja-fi&aolig;llom, ok sn&oelig;re á lofte, ok kom holfande niðr: hann vas<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a267.6>siau rúm ok tottogo. Páska-dag enn fyrsta m&aoacute;tto fáer menn tíðer <anchor id=a267.7>s&oeacute;kja at taka <hi lang=la>corpus domini</hi><note place=apparatus id=an267.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <hi>h</hi>; taca þionosto, Cd.</note>; en sumer urðo úte dauðer.

<p n=1.1.1><anchor id=a267.8>Annat íll-viðre (varð) efter andlát hans þann dag es menn riðo á <anchor id=a267.9>þing<note place=apparatus id=an267.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>onnor hríð, <hi>h</hi>. á þing]</ab> til Alþingis, <hi>h</hi>.</note>; ok drap fé manna fyr norðan land<note place=apparatus id=an267.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok drap ... land]</ab> add. <hi>h</hi>.</note>: þá braut kirkjo á Þingvelle, <anchor id=a267.10>þá es Haralldr konungr Sigurðar son hafðe láteð h&oelig;ggva<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a267.11>viðenn til.

<p n=1.1.2><anchor id=a267.12>Þat sumar fóro xxxv skipa út hingat, ok braut m&aolig;rg víð land; <anchor id=a267.13>en sum leyste í hafe under m&aolig;nnom; en átta ein kómosk braut <anchor id=a267.14>með þeim es áðr vóro her; ok kómosk þau enge fyrer Michials-messo <anchor id=a267.15>or hafe. Af þeim mann-fi&aolig;lða varð her hallære miket.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<pb id=pb268 n=268><p n=1.2><anchor id=a268.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Einom vetre efter andlát Gizorar byscops vas Þórsteinn Hallvarz <anchor id=a268.2>son vegenn, g&aolig;fogr maðr.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a268.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En vetre efter þat vas þing fiol-ment. Þau missere hafðe <anchor id=a268.4>svá mikell mann-dauðr vereð, at Sæmundr prestr enn Fróðe sagðe <anchor id=a268.5>svá á þinge, at eige m&oelig;nde fære menn hafa andask af sótt, an þá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a268.6>vóro til þings komner.

<p><anchor id=a268.7>Þat sumar vas þr&oelig;ng mikel at dómom. Þá særðe Þórgils Odda <anchor id=a268.8>son Hafliða Márs son. Þá varð um ecki mál at l&aolig;gom d&oeacute;mt. <anchor id=a268.9>Þórgils varð sekr um áverkann, ok sat í sekð um vetrenn.

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a268.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þá vas svá lítill vápna-burðr, at ein vas stál-húfa þá á Alþinge;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a268.11>ok reið driúgom hverr bónde til þings es þá vas á Íslande.

<p n=1.5><anchor id=a268.12><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Enn vas þat es þrír vetr vóro liðner frá andláte Gizorar <anchor id=a268.13>byscops, andaðesk Ioan byscop at Hólom ...<note place=apparatus id=an268.1><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Blank.</note> <hi>kal.</hi> Maij.

<p n=1.6><anchor id=a268.14><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þat sumar reið Hafliðe Márs son á þing með m.cc. manna; <anchor id=a268.15>en Þórgils Odda son með dcc. manna. Þeir sættosk á þinge með<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a268.16>því, at Þórgils selde Hafliða sialf-d&oeacute;me. En hann g&oelig;rðe sex tige <anchor id=a268.17>hundraða sex alna aura v&aolig;ro-virtz feár: lúka í golle eða brendo <anchor id=a268.18>silfre, eða s&oeacute;melegom gripom: skylde hann virða sialfr Hafliðe, <anchor id=a268.19>eða þeir es hann t&oeacute;ke til.

<p n=1.6.1><anchor id=a268.20>Þat sumar vas kiorenn<note place=apparatus id=an268.2><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> hann kosenn, Cd.</note> til byscops Ketill Þórsteins son af M&aolig;ðro-v&aolig;llom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a268.21>í stað Ioans byscops; ok fór hann útan þat sumar.

<pb id=pb269 n=269><p n=1.7><anchor id=a269.1><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Hafliðe Márs son átte fyrr Þórríðe, dóttor Þórðar Sturlo <anchor id=a269.2>sonar: Þórðr hét son þeirra; hann átte Solv&aolig;ro, dóttor Ásgríms <anchor id=a269.3>Þórhallz sonar. Ívarr hét son þeirra. Hafliðe átte síðarr Rann&shy;veigo, <anchor id=a269.4>dóttor Teitz or Hauka-dale: Sigríðr hét dótter þeirra; es <anchor id=a269.5>átte Þórðr í Vatz-firðe. Snorre<note place=apparatus id=an269.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Snorre]</ab> Þorðr, Cd.</note> ok Páll vóro syner þeirra. Val&shy;gerðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a269.6>hét &aolig;nnor dótter þeirra Hafliða: hána átte Ingimundr <anchor id=a269.7>prestr, Illoga son ok Orno, dóttor Þórkels Gellis sonar: Illoge vas <anchor id=a269.8>son þeirra, es drucknaðe þá es hann flutte ...<note place=apparatus id=an269.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Blank, <hi>read</hi> af Englande?</note> lím til stein-kirkjo <anchor id=a269.9>þeirrar, es hann ætlaðe at g&oelig;ra á Breiða-bólstað í Vestr-hópe.

<p n=2.1><anchor id=a269.10><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Rognvallðr</hi> iarl Kale vas vegenn v nóttom efter<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a269.11>Mário-messo fyrre.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a269.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En Oláfr konungr Tryggva son barðesk á Orme&apos;nom Langa <anchor id=a269.13>nesta dag efter Mário-messo.<note place=apparatus id=an269.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Here John Erlendsson ends.</note>

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a269.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Oaldar-vetr varð mikill á Íslande í heiðne, í þann <anchor id=a269.15>tíma es Haraldr konungr Gráfelldr fell, en Hákon<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a269.16>iarl tók ríke í Norege. Sá hefer mestr orðet á Íslande. Þá &aoacute;to <anchor id=a269.17>menn hrafna ok mel-racka; ok m&aolig;rg ó-átan íll vas eten; en <anchor id=a269.18>sumer léto drepa gamal-menne ok ómaga; ok hrinda fyr hamra. <anchor id=a269.19>Þá sulto marger menn til bana; en sumer l&aolig;gðosk út at stela, ok <anchor id=a269.20>urðo fyre þat seker ok dræper<note place=apparatus id=an269.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> drepner, Cd.</note>. Þá v&aoacute;gosk skógar-menn sialfer,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a269.21>þvi at þat vas l&aolig;g-teket, at ráðe Eyjolfs Valgerðar sonar, at hverr <anchor id=a269.22>frelste sik sa es þriá dræpe sekja.

<pb id=pb270 n=270><p n=3.2><anchor id=a270.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Átta tegom vetra síðarr varð annat ó-áran: þat hófsk þann <anchor id=a270.2>vetr es Ísleifr tók byscops-vígslo af Alberto Brima-byscope; en þat <anchor id=a270.3>vas um daga Harallz konungs Sigurðar sonar. Enn fyrsta<note place=apparatus id=an270.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> En þann, Cd.</note> vetr es <anchor id=a270.4>Ísleifr byscop vas á Íslande, vas mann-dauðr<note place=apparatus id=an270.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> -dauði, Cd.</note> sem mestr á Íslande <anchor id=a270.5>af sulte: þá vas allt eteð þat es t&aolig;nn feste á. En um sumaret lét<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a270.6>byscop því heita á þinge, at menn skyldo fasta enn Tolfta dag Ióla <anchor id=a270.7>um þriú &aoacute;r: þvi at svá vas g&oelig;rt í Herfurðu þar es byscop hafðe <anchor id=a270.8>í scola vereð á Saxlande. Þá vas svá snæ-miket hver-vetna, at <anchor id=a270.9>menn gengo flester til Alþingiss. En es heiteð vas, batnaðe þegar <anchor id=a270.10>veðrátta, ok varð sumar et bazta; en vetrenn efter vas svá góðr,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a270.11>at einge kom þele í i&aolig;rð; ok gengo menn ber-f&oeacute;tter til tíða um <anchor id=a270.12>Iól; en húsaðo ok l&aolig;gðo garða á Þorra. Et næsta sumar efter <anchor id=a270.13>vas þat l&aolig;g-teket, at iamnan skylde fasta enn tolfta dag Ióla, ef <anchor id=a270.14>eige bære á Dróttens-dag.&mdash;Son Ísleifs vas Gizorr byscop.

<p n=4.1><anchor id=a270.15><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Biarne Skegg-brodda son</hi> sótte elde-hús-við í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a270.16>Norege, ok g&oelig;rðe eld-hús í Krossa-vík, half-fert&oelig;gt <anchor id=a270.17>f&aolig;ðmom; en xiiij alna hátt ok xiiij alna breitt&mdash;hann vas því <anchor id=a270.18>kallaðr Biarne Hús-langr. Hann drucknaðe með siaunda mann á <anchor id=a270.19>Skialfanda, es hann fór til þings.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a270.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Brodde Þóris son, bróðor son Biarna Húslangs, f&oeacute;rðe skálann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a270.21>mikla or Krossa-vík til Hofs, ok lét þar upp g&oelig;ra. Hann vas þá <anchor id=a270.22>half-þrít&oelig;gr f&aolig;ðmom, ok xiij alna breiðr, ok xiij alna hárr. Brodde <anchor id=a271.1><pb id=pb271 n=271>vas enn meste ágætis-maðr, ok varð fé-lauss; hann fór þá vestr til <anchor id=a271.2>Hóla í Hialta-dal til Ketils byscops Þórsteins-sonar, ok andaðesk <anchor id=a271.3>þar með hónom.

<p n=5.1><anchor id=a271.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Sigurðr</hi>, son Sigmundar konungs, es kallaðr vas <anchor id=a271.5>Fáfnes-bane, ok Brynhildr Buðla dótter &aoacute;tto dóttor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a271.6>þá es Áslaug hét; hon vas f&oeacute;dd með Heime iarle í Hlymd&aolig;lom<note place=apparatus id=an271.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Hring-dolom, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a271.7>þar til es hann var drepenn. Ragnarr Loðbrók, son Sigurðar <anchor id=a271.8>Hrings, átte Þóro, dóttor Herrauðar Gauta-iarls: þeirra b&aolig;rn vóro <anchor id=a271.9>þau Agnarr, ok Eirikr, ok Álof, es átte Hunda-Steinarr Engla-earl. <anchor id=a271.10>Þeirra son var Bi&aolig;rn, faðer Auðunnar Skokuls, f&aolig;ðor Þóro<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a271.11>Mos-hals, móðor Ulfhildar, er átte Guðbrandr Kúla: þeirra dótter <anchor id=a271.12>Ásta, móðer Óláfs konungs ens Helga. Annarr son Hunda-Steinars <anchor id=a271.13>ok Álofar hét Eirikr; hann var faðer Sigurðar Bióða-skalla, <anchor id=a271.14>f. Víkinga-Kára, f. þeirra B&aolig;ðvars ok Vígfúss, ok Eiriks á <anchor id=a271.15>Ofrostoðom, f. Ástríðar, m. Óláfs konungs Tryggva sonar. Dótter<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a271.16>Vígfúss vas Ástríðr, móðer Víga-Glúms, f. Vígfúss, f. Bergs, <anchor id=a271.17>f. Steinunnar, m. Þórsteins Ranglátz, f. Guðrúnar, m. H&aolig;llo, <anchor id=a271.18>m. Flosa, f. Valgerðar, m. Herra Erlendz Logmannz, f. Herra <anchor id=a271.19>Hauks. Álof hét dótter B&aolig;ðvars hersiss, er átte Teitr Ketilbiarnar <anchor id=a271.20>son frá Mosfelle: þeirra son Gizurr Hvíte, f. Ísleifs byscops, f. Gizurar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a271.21>byscops.&mdash;Ragnarr Loðbrók átte síðarr Áslaugu, d. Sigurðar <anchor id=a271.22>Fáfnis-bana; Sigurðr Ormr-í-auga var son þeirra, ok Hvítserkr, <anchor id=a271.23>ok Bi&aolig;rn Iarn-síða, ok Ívarr hinn Beinlause, ok Ragnhildr.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a271.24><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Halfdan Svarte, Upplendinga konungr, son Guðr&oelig;ðar Lióma, <anchor id=a271.25>átte Þóro, dóttor Harallz Gollskeggs Sygna-konungs ok Solvarar<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a271.26>Húnolfs dóttor iarls or Fiorðom, systor Atla iarls ens Mióva. Son <anchor id=a271.27>þeirra Halfdanar ok Þóro vas Haraldr. En es hann vas ungr, þá <anchor id=a271.28>andaðesk móðer hans, en sveinnenn lítlo síðarr. Lítlo síðarr feck <anchor id=a271.29>Halfdan Ragnildar, dóttor Sigurðar Hiartar: móðer Sigurðar vas <anchor id=a271.30>Áslaug, dótter Sigurðar Orms-í-auga: þeirra son var Haraldr enn<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a271.31>Hárfagre. En þá er hann vas tio vetra, þá drucknaðe Halfdan <anchor id=a271.32>faðer hans á Hringa-ríke í vatne því Rond heiter, es hann ok efter <anchor id=a271.33>ísenom; þá brast íssenn es hann kom á nauta-brunna fyre Svez-stoðom <anchor id=a271.34>í Rykin-vík; ok drucknaðe hann þar ok allt lið hans; tók <anchor id=a272.1><pb id=pb272 n=272>þá Haraldr konungs-nafn. En þá es hann vas tvít&oelig;gr, þá lagðe <anchor id=a272.2>hann fyrst under sik Sygna-fylke; en Atle iarl hafðe aldrige skatt <anchor id=a272.3>goldet. En síðan lagðe hann under sik allan Noreg; sem seger í <anchor id=a272.4>S&aolig;go hans.

<p n=5.3><anchor id=a272.5><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Víkarr hét konungr son, Harallz Egða-konungs: hans son<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a272.6>vas Vatnarr konungr, sá es haug á fyr sunnan Hákonar-hello. <anchor id=a272.7>Einn kaup-maðr í Norege vas sá es sagðe s&aolig;go Vatnars es þeir <anchor id=a272.8>siglðo með lande framm, ok kallaðe hann veret hafa ágætan mann. <anchor id=a272.9>En es hann lá við Vatnars-haug, dreymðe hann at Vatnarr <anchor id=a272.10>konungr kom at hónom ok mælte við hann: &lsquo;Þú hefer sagt s&aolig;go<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a272.11>mína; vil-ek þat launa þer: leita þer feár í hauge mínom, ok <anchor id=a272.12>montú finna.&rsquo; Hann leitaðe, ok fann þar miket fé.

<p n=5.4><anchor id=a272.13><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Svá es sagt, at Haraldr konungr Harð-ráðe lá við Glaum-stein <anchor id=a272.14>í Hallande með her sínn. Þeir s&aoacute; þar haug mikinn á siávar-hellonne, <anchor id=a272.15>ok annan lítlo ofarr. Hann spurðe hverer þar være<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a272.16>leidder; en þat kunne einge at segja. En um nóttena efter es <anchor id=a272.17>hann hafðe þessa spurt, dreymðe Sigurð enn Hvíta, at maðr kom <anchor id=a272.18>at hónom í her-klæðom, ok kvað þetta:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a272.19>Sniallr á haug á hello, ...
</lg>

<p n=5.4.1><anchor id=a272.20>Ena s&aolig;mo nótt dreymðe Bi&aolig;rn Buck, at annarr maðr kom at<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a272.21>hónom með enom sama búninge, ok kvað víso:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a272.22>Mín stóð búð ...
</lg>

<pb id=pb273 n=273><p n=5.4.2><anchor id=a273.1>En es Haraldr konungr kom til Noregs, þá sagðe hónom Káre <anchor id=a273.2>enn Svarte, frænde Þióðolfs or Hvine, at þeir vóro syner Vatnars <anchor id=a273.3>konungs, þeir Sniallr ok Hialdr, ok vóro ener mesto her-menn.

<p n=5.5><anchor id=a273.4><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Sniallr vas faðer Einars, f. Olves Barna-karls: hans son vas <anchor id=a273.5>Steinmóðr, ok Steinolfr, ok Grímr; ok Einarr, f. þeirra Hrolleifs,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a273.6>f. Svertings, f. Gríms at Mosfelle; ok Oleifs Breiðs, f. þeirra Þórmóðs <anchor id=a273.7>Skafta, ok Ofeigs Grettiss. Svá segja sumer menn, at Guðbrandr <anchor id=a273.8>Kúla være son Óleifs<note place=apparatus id=an273.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Ofeigs, 104.</note> Breiðs; en Hialdr vas faðer Gríms, <anchor id=a273.9>f. Biarnar Buno. Biorn Buna átte Vélaugo, systor Vémundar ens <anchor id=a273.10>Gamla: þeirra syner vóro þeir Ketill Flatnefr, ok Hrappr, ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a273.11>Helge, f. Helga, f. Heyangrs-Biarnar, es ríkr herser<note place=apparatus id=an273.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> hverr er, Cd.</note> ok ágætr vas <anchor id=a273.12>í Sogne.

<p n=5.6><anchor id=a273.13><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Yxna-Þórer hét maðr ágætr á Ogðom ok auðegr. Hann <anchor id=a273.14>átte þær þriár eyjar, es átta tiger yxna vóro í hverre. En es <anchor id=a273.15>Haralldr konungr Hárfagre bað hann strand-h&oelig;ggs, þá gaf hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a273.16>hónom eina eyna, ok alla yxnena með&mdash;af því vas hann kallaðr <anchor id=a273.17>Yxna-Þórer. Ok (er) frá hónom komet mart stór-menne á Íslande <anchor id=a273.18>ok (í) Norege. Son Þóres vas Ósvaldr, faðer Olves ens Hvíta, <anchor id=a273.19>f. Þórsteins ens Hvíta, f. Þórgils, f. Brodd-Helga, f. Víga-Biarna.


<p n=6.1><anchor id=a273.20><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þesse</hi> ero n&aolig;fn byscopa þeirra útlendra es veret hafa<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a273.21>á Íslande.&mdash;Friðrekr, Biarnarðr, Óláfr Gr&oeacute;nlendinga <anchor id=a273.22>byscop, Kolr, Rodolfr, Ioan, Biarnarðr, Heinrekr, Arnaldr Gr&oeacute;nlendinga <anchor id=a273.23>byscop, Ioan Gr&oeacute;nlendinga byscop, ok Helge Gr&oeacute;nlendinga <anchor id=a273.24>byscop.

<p><anchor id=a273.25>Vereð hafa enn fleire es byscopar létosk vesa, Guðiscolkr,<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a273.26>Ornolfr; ok iij af Armenia, Petrus, Stephanus, ok Abraham.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a273.27><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Freðrekr byscop kom í heiðne til Íslannz með Þórvalde Víð&shy;f&aolig;rla, <anchor id=a274.1><pb id=pb274 n=274>ok vas at Gilj-&aoacute; ok L&oeacute;kja-móti. Biarnarðr enn Bókúse vas <anchor id=a274.2>á Íslande fimm vetr. Kolr f&aoacute; &aoacute;r. Rodolfr xix &aoacute;r. Io<hi>a</hi>n enn <anchor id=a274.3>Saxneski iiij &aoacute;r. Heinrekr ij &aoacute;r. Biarnarðr xix &aoacute;r; hann bió <anchor id=a274.4>at Gilj&aoacute; í Vatz-dal.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=en.mantissa lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">


<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> In the year in which bishop Gizor died [1118] there came a great famine in Iceland. There came a snowstorm in the dumb-bell-days [Holy Week], so that men could not keep the hours [attend the offices] in the churches in some hundreds in the north of the land. And long-fast-day [Good Friday, 12 Apr.] there was a cog taken up under Ey-fell and whirled aloft and cast down again bottom upward; she was a ship of seven-and-twenty benches. The first day of Pask [Easter, 14 Apr.] few men could seek the hours [go to the offices] to take the sacrament, but some died of cold out of doors.

<p n=1.1.1>A second storm happened after his death on the day when men rode to Moot, and killed the people&apos;s live stock in the North Quarter [June 19 <hi>or</hi> 20]. The church at the Tynwall <hi>or</hi> Moot-field for which king Harold Sigurd&apos;s son had had the wood hewn was then broken down.

<p n=1.1.2>That summer thirty-five ships came out here, and many were wrecked upon the shore, and some foundered at sea with all hands, and eight only got away again, with them that were here before [counting those that wintered the year before], and they did not get over the sea till after Michaelmas. By reason of this multitude of men there came about a great famine here.

<pb id=pb268a n=268><p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> One winter after the death of bishop Gizor [1119] Thor-stan Hall-ward&apos;s son, a gentleman, was slain.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And the winter after the Moot was crowded [1120]. Those seasons there had been such a mortality that priest Sæmund the historian said thus at the Moot, that there must have died no fewer men of sickness than there were come thither to the Moot.

<p>That summer there was a great throng at the Doom-court, when Thor-gils Orde&apos;s son wounded Haf-lide Mar&apos;s son. It was so that no case could be lawfully deemed <hi>or</hi> judged. Thor-gils was outlawed for the assault, and sat in outlawry through the winter.

<p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> There was so little bearing of weapons at that time that there was only one steel-cap at the All-moot, and yet almost every franklin that was then in Iceland rode to the Moot.

<p n=1.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> And now it happened when three winters were passed from the death of bishop Gizor that bishop John of Holar died [ix] kalend Maji [23 April, 1121].

<p n=1.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> That summer Haf-lide Mar&apos;s son rode to the Moot with twelve hundred [1440] men, and Thor-gils Orde&apos;s son with seven hundred [840] men. They were set at peace at the Moot on the understanding that Thor-gils gave Haf-lide self-doom [his own terms], and his award was sixty hundreds of six ells-ounces of merchant standard, and paid in gold or burnt silver, or seemly things of worth, and Haf-lide himself should value them, or they whom he appointed thereto.

<p n=1.6.1>That summer was chosen bishop Cetil Thor-stan&apos;s son in bishop John&apos;s stead, and he went out [abroad] that summer.

<pb id=pb269a n=269><p n=1.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Haf-lide Mar&apos;s son had to wife first Thor-rid, daughter of Thord, Sturla&apos;s son. The name of their son was Thord, who had to wife Sol-ware, daughter of As-grim, Thor-hall&apos;s son. Their son&apos;s name was Iwar. Afterwards Haf-lide married Rand-weig, daughter of Tait of Hawk-dale. Their daughter&apos;s name was Sig-rid, whom Thord o&apos; Water-dale had to wife. Snorre and Paul were their sons. Another daughter of Haf-lide and Rand-weig was called Wal-gerd, whom Ingimund the priest, the son of Illuge and of Arna, daughter of Thor-kell, Gelle&apos;s son, had to wife. Illuge was their son, who was drowned as he was bringing from [? England] lime for the stone church which he meant to build at Broad-bowster in West-hope.

<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Earl Rogn-wald</hi> was slain five nights after the first Mary-mass [Aug. 20, 1158].

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But king An-laf, Tryggva&apos;s son, fought on the Long Serpent the next day after the latter Mary-mass [i. e. Sept. 9, 1000].

<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a great winter of dearth in Iceland in heathen days in the time when Harold Gray-fell fell [976], and earl Hacon took power in Norway. That has been the greatest [famine] in Iceland. Then men ate ravens and foxes, and many bad uneatable things were eaten; and some had the aged and helpless slain and cast over cliffs. Then many men starved to death, and some lay out stealing [took to robbing], and were therefore outlawed and slain. Then the men of the shaw [outlaws] slew one another, for it was then made law, by the counsel of Ey-wolf Walgerd&apos;s son, that he should free himself who slew three outlaws.

<pb id=pb270a n=270><p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Eighty winters [1056] later there was another dearth. It began the winter that Is-laf took bishop&apos;s hallowing at the hands of Albertus, bishop of Bremen. That was in the days of king Harold, Sigurd&apos;s son.

<p>And the first winter [1056&ndash;7] that bishop Is-laf was in Iceland there was the greatest mortality in Iceland through hunger. Everything was eaten then that the tooth could bite on. And in the summer the bishop made a vow at the Moot, that men should fast the Twelfth-day of Yule for three years; for so it was done in Her-forth [Her-ford] when the bishop had been to school in Sax-land. There was at the time so much snow everywhere that most men walked to the All-moot [middle of June]; but when the vow was made, immediately the weather bettered, and it became the finest summer; and the winter after [1057&ndash;8] was so good that there came no frost in the earth, and men went barefoot to the hours [to church] at Yule-tide, and put up houses and made fences in Thorre [January&ndash;February]. The next summer [1158] after it was made law that men should always fast the Twelfth-day of Yule if it did not fall on a Lord&apos;s-day. Bishop Gizor was the son of bishop Is-laf.

<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Bearne Scegge&apos;s son</hi> sought wood for a fire-house [hall] in Norway, and made a fire-house in Cross-wick, half forty [35] fathoms long, and fourteen ells high, and fourteen ells broad, wherefore he was called Bearne Long-house. He was drowned with seven men in Shelving-bay as he was going to the Moot.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Brorde Thore&apos;s son, brother&apos;s son of Bearne Long-house, carried the great hall out of Cross-wick to Temple and had it set up there. It was then half thirty [25] fathoms long, and thirteen ells broad, and <pb id=pb271a n=271>thirteen ells high. Brorde was the greatest man to keep up an estate, and he became wealthless [poor]. Then he went west to Holar in Healte-dale to bishop Cetil Thor-stan&apos;s son and died there at his house.

<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi>The genealogies of Olaf the Saint, Hauk, Bishop Gizor.</hi>

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> See Ld. V. 11. 1. <hi>The genealogy of Harold Fairhair.</hi> But when he was ten winters old his father Half-dan was drowned in Ringa-ric in the mere that is called Rond as he was driving over the ice, and the ice broke when he came to the cattle-rills [i. e. holes cut in the ice for the cattle to drink from] over against Swers-stead in Rykins-wick, and he was drowned there and all his men. Then Harold took the name of <pb id=pb272a n=272>king. But when he was twenty he first laid under him, <hi>or</hi> his rule, Sogn-folk, but earl Atle had never paid scot. And afterwards he laid under him, <hi>or</hi> got under his rule, all Norway, as it is said in the history of him.

<p n=5.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Wic-here was the name of a king, the son of Harold, king of the Agds. His son was king Watn-here, whose barrow is south of Hacon-slate [an island south of Bergen]. There was a chapman in Norway that was telling the history of Watn-here as they sailed along the land, and he said that he had been a noble man. But when they lay off Watn-here&apos;s howe he dreamed that king Watn-here came to him and spoke to him: &lsquo;Thou hast told my history; I will reward thee therefore; seek thou treasure in my howe and thou shalt find.&rsquo; He sought and found there much treasure.

<p n=5.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> It is said that king Harold Hard-rede lay off Gleam-stone in Halland [Swedish coast] with his host. They saw there a great howe on the sea-cliff, and another a little above. He asked who were laid there, and no one could tell him. But the night after he had asked, Sigurd the White dreamed that a man came to him in war-clothes and recited this:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>&lsquo;Snell has a barrow on the cliff. Heald on the hill.
    <l>Victory is on your spears. Wake to a day of blood.&rsquo;
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor., ii. 328.]


<p n=5.4.1>And the same night Beorn Buck dreamed that another man came to him in the same gear, and recited the verse:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>&lsquo;My booth is the farthest:
    <l>We are glad ye give slain to Woden.&rsquo;
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor., 1. c]


<pb id=pb273a n=273><p n=5.4.2>But when king Harold came to Norway, then Care the Black, the kinsman of Thord-wolf of Hwin, said that they were the sons of king Watn-here, Snell and Heald, and they were the greatest of warriors.

<p n=5.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Snell was the father of Ein-here, the father of Olwe Bairn-carle. His sons were Stan-mod and Stan-wolf and Grim; and Ein-here, father of Hrod-laf (father of Swerting, father of Grim o&apos; Moss-fell), and of Oleif Broad, the father of Thor-mod Shaft and Un-fey Grette. Some men say that Gud-brand Cula was the son of Olaf Broad, but Heald was the father of Grim, the father of Beorn Bune. See Ld. V. 13. 1.

<p n=5.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Oxen-Thore was the name of a noble and a wealthy man in Agd. He had three islands there, and there were eighty oxen on each; but when king Harold Fairhair asked him for a strand-hew [i. e. provision of meat for his ships], he gave him an island and all the oxen upon it, wherefore he was called Oxen-Thore. And from him are come many a great man in Iceland and in Norway. The son of Thore was Os-wald, the father of Olaf the White, the father of Thor-stan the White, the father of Thor-gils, the father of Brord-Helge, the father of Slaughter-Bearne.

<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> [<hi>Names of the foreign bishops that have been in Iceland. See Libellus and Hungrvaca.</hi>]


</div2>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<div2 id=s1.4.1>
<head><hi>The Tale of Gar-mund Hell-skin.</hi> [Cp. Ld. II. ch. 17.]</head>

<p>The Text, see Sturl. (1878) I. chs. 1&ndash;6.


<p>Gar-mund Hell-skin was the son of king Heor, the son of Half (after whom Half&apos;s renks <hi>or</hi> champions are called), the son of king Heor-laf. The second son of king Heor was Heah-mund, who was also called Hell-skin. They were twins. And this is the old tale of why they were called Hell-skin. It happened at the time when king Heor was to go to the tryst of kings that the queen was great with child, and she was brought to bed while the king was out of the country, and she bore two boys. They were both wonderful big, and both of marvellous fair countenance, but yet there was the greatest blemish to be seen in them that no one thought darker skins had been seen than these boys had. The queen set little love on the boys, and they looked unlovely to her. Shag-hood was the name of the thrall that had the governance of the other thralls. This thrall was married, and his wife gave birth to her son at the very same time that the queen was brought to bed; and this boy that the thrall&apos;s wife had was so wonderfully fair that the queen could see no blemish in him, and this boy seemed to her more lovely than her own boys. So the queen was minded to make an exchange with the bondmaid of the boys. But it was with the bondmaid as with the queen: she thought her son showed the better breeding; nevertheless she did not dare to refuse to make an exchange of the boys with the queen. And so the queen took the bondmaid&apos;s son, and had a name given him and called the boy Laf, and the queen called the boy her son. But the bondmaid took the queen&apos;s, and they were bred up in the straw on the floor like other bondchildren until they were three winters old. But Laf played with his hands, <hi>or</hi> lived at his ease, in plenty, and was honoured as kings&apos; sons are wont to be. But as the boys grew up and got older together, Laf began to dwindle, but Heah-mund and Gar-mund got on fast the older they got, and each began to take more after his own kin.

<p>It is told that once on a time Brage the poet was bidden to a feast at king Heor&apos;s, and stayed with the king some little while, and one day, it is said, the king went a hunting with his men, and there were few folk left at home in the hall. Brage the poet stayed at home, and he was sitting in the high bench with a rod of reed in his hand, playing with it, and muttering to himself, his head wrapped in his cloak. The queen lay on the daïs in the inner end of the hall, and she was covered with clothes so that no one would know that she was there, save those that had known it before. Laf was sitting in the high seat playing with a golden ring, but the brethren Heah-mund and Gar-mund were sitting on the floor looking at Laf playing with the ring. They could see no one in the hall. Then Gar-mund said to his brother, &lsquo;Shall we two go to Laf and take away the golden ring from him, and play with it ourselves for awhile?&rsquo; &lsquo;I am ready to do it,&rsquo; says Heah-mund. Then the boys ran up the hall to the high seat, and took the golden ring from Laf, but he fell a whimpering after it. Then they spake. &lsquo;Listen,&rsquo; said they, &lsquo;how the king&apos;s son is behaving; he is crying after a golden ring, and it is a true saying, that what thou <pb id=pb275a n=275>hast is ill bestowed.&rsquo; And with that the boys caught hold of Laf and pulled him out of the high seat and laughed at him. Then Brage the poet stood up and walked up to where the queen lay on the daïs and touched her with the reeden rod, and spake this verse. [See Book I. p. 88.] The queen stood up and took the <hi>twin</hi> boys and went out and made a second exchange with the bondmaid. And now the queen saw how it was that they were growing up full of promise, as it was likely they would and according to their birth.

<p>But in the evening when the king came home and had sat him down in his high seat, the queen walked up to the king leading the <hi>two</hi> boys with her, and told the king all that had happened and how she had made an exchange with the bondwoman, and begged forgiveness of the king. The king looked at the boys, and said, &lsquo;Surely I take these boys to be of my kin, but yet I have never before seen such a pair of <hi rend=sc>HELL-SKINS</hi> as these boys!&rsquo; Wherefore they were called Hell-skins ever after.

<p>And as soon as they were full grown they went abroad a-warring, and soon got both riches and renown thereby, and long led great fleets, as it is told in some old tales and somewhat touched on in the latter part of the <hi>Tale of Rook the Black</hi>&mdash;to wit, that these brethren were called then the greatest warriors of sea-kings at that time.

<p>And it happened one summer as they were on a Western cruise that they got much more booty than other summers, as the story goes. And before they came home they shared their booty of that summer, and there fell to each one&apos;s lot twenty pounds of silver and two pounds of gold. And that same summer they broke up their company, and each of them sent his men away with good payment. The brethren sailed together each in his own ship to the kingdom of the king of Norway. King Harold Fairhair was then ruling over Norway, and the brethren thought to find a frith-land <hi>or</hi> asylum there, and they broke up their fleet and partnership. But when the king heard of it he did not like their staying there, and thought it not unlikely that they might gather strength and come against him. And some men will have it that Gar-mund went to Iceland by reason of the tyranny of king Harold. But I have heard that in those days when the brethren came off their Western cruise, it was the talk of most that there could be no more famous voyage than that to Iceland, and that is why Gar-mund was minded to sail out thither; that very summer he and his brother came to Norway, though it was then late in the summer. But Heah-mund would not do so, and Heah-mund went to meet with Helge the Lean, and afterwards they <hi>also</hi> went out together to Iceland.

<p>But Gar-mund went out at once and made Broad-frith in his ship, and was at Booth-dale the first winter he was in Iceland. But in the spring he took land in settlement [<hi>the Tale goes on as in</hi> Ld.].

<p>Gar-mund dwelt at Gar-mund-stead till he was stricken in age. But there was one combe in the lands of Gar-mund that he used to say he would choose away out of his lands if he could have his will, and chiefly for this reason, &lsquo;that there is a place in the combe whence whenever I look at it comes a light that blinds my eyes, which I do not like; and this light is always over the rowan-grove that grows there apart under the brink <hi>of the hill</hi>.&rsquo; And it came to this pass, that if at any time some of his cattle had been in the combe he would have the day&apos;s milk thrown away. And once on a time, as it is said, his cattle had lain there all night. And when the shepherd rose up and saw the cattle in the combe he was mightily afraid, and ran as fast as he could and hunted the cattle <pb id=pb276a n=276>out of the combe, and broke a stick out of the rowan-coppice and beat the cattle with it, and drove the cattle home to Gar-mund-stead. But Gar-mund had got up out of bed that morning and gone out of doors, and he saw the shepherd hunting the cattle down out of the combe, and he was not at all pleased that the cattle had been there, and he turned to meet the shepherd, and soon espied that he had a wand of rowan in his hand beating the cattle with it. And now he grew so furious <hi>or</hi> frantic at both these things together, that he ran upon the shepherd and beat him mightily, bidding him never do such a thing again as to beat his cattle with the wood that grew in this combe, and least of all of that rowan-coppice; but Gar-mund could easily tell the wood, because there only in his estate did rowan-wood grow, on the very spot where the church of Scard now stands, according as we have heard true historians tell. Gar-mund had the wand taken and burnt in the fire, and his cattle he had driven to the pasture, and that day&apos;s milk thrown away.&mdash;<hi>Sturlunga</hi> I. chs. 1&ndash;6.



<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 id=halfssaga lang=is rend="align-with(en.halfssaga)">
<head lang=en-UK><hi>A third version, from the end of Half&apos;s Saga, extant in a single copy.</hi></head>


<p n=1><anchor id=a276.1>Hiorr konungr Halfs son átte Hagnýjo, dóttor Haka konungs <anchor id=a276.2>Hámundar sonar. Hiorr konungr fór í kononga-stefno; en <anchor id=a276.3>meðan f&oeacute;dde Hagný tvá sono, ok hét annarr Hámundr, en annarr <anchor id=a276.4>Geirmundr. Þá f&oeacute;dde ambótt ok son, ok hét Leifr; hann vas <anchor id=a276.5>enn fríðaste: dróttning keypte um sono við ambótt, ok f&oeacute;rðe<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a276.6>þann konunge.

<p n=2><anchor id=a276.7>Konungr fór enn annat sinn í leiðangr; þá vóro sveinarner þrí <anchor id=a276.8>vetrer. Leifr gugnaðe sem á aldr hans leið, en Hámundr ok Geirmundr <anchor id=a276.9>vóro geyse-mikler ok orð-víser. Brage skáld kom þar at <anchor id=a276.10>heimboðe.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=3><anchor id=a276.11>Þat vas einn dag at karlar aller fóro á skóg, en konor á <anchor id=a276.12>hnet-skóg, ok vas ecke heima-manna í h&aolig;llenne<note place=apparatus id=an276.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> hulin, Cd.</note>, nema Brage sat <anchor id=a276.13>í &aolig;ndoge, en dróttning leyndesk þar ok vas hulið klæðom. Leifr <anchor id=a276.14>sat í há-sæte ok lék ser at golle; en Hámundr ok Geirmundr vóro <anchor id=a277.1><pb id=pb277 n=277>í halmenom niðr-á golfeno: þá fóro þeir til Leifs ok skúfoðo hónom <anchor id=a277.2>or sæteno ok tóko þeir af hónom gollet allt: hann grét þá. Þá <anchor id=a277.3>stóð Brage upp ok geck þar til es dróttning lá, ok drap staf ofan í <anchor id=a277.4>klæðen, ok kvað:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a277.5>Tveir &apos;ro, ok trueg vel báðom....<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a277.6>F&oeacute;dder eige þú þann m&aolig;g, kona.
</lg>

<p n=4><anchor id=a277.7>Síðan skipte Hagný aptr sveinonom við ambótt.

<p n=5><anchor id=a277.8>En es Hiorr konungr kom heim, þá bar hon sveinana til hans <anchor id=a277.9>ok sagðe at þeir vóro hans syner. Konongr svarar: &lsquo;Berr í braut,&rsquo; <anchor id=a277.10>sagðe hann, &lsquo;eige sá-ek slík heljar-skinn.&rsquo;&mdash;Þeir vóro báðer svá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a277.11>kallaðer síðan. Þeir vóro mikler afreks-menn at afle, ok mikel <anchor id=a277.12>ætt es frá þeim komen á Íslande: Þórer á Espe-hóle vas son <anchor id=a277.13>Hámundar&mdash;þaðan ero komner Espelingar. Geirmundr Heljar-skinn <anchor id=a277.14>nam Meðalfellz-str&aolig;nd í Breiða-firðe: Ýre hét dótter hans; <anchor id=a277.15>ok es þaðan mikel ætt komen.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 id=en.halfssaga lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">


<p n=1>King Heor, the son of Half, had to wife Hag-ny, the daughter of king Hake, Ha-mund&apos;s son. King Heor went to the tryst of kings, and meanwhile Hag-ny bore two sons, and they were dark and wonderfully ugly, and the one was called Heah-mund and the other Gar-mund. There was a bondwoman also that bore a son, and he was called Laf. He was very fair to see. The queen exchanged sons with the bondwoman, and brought him to the king. The king went away a second time on a barge when the boys were three winters old. Laf dwindled as he grew up, but Heah-mund and Gar-mund were stout and strong, and quick to talk. Brage the poet came there to a feast. It happened one day that the men were all gone to the wood to hunt and the women nutting, and there was no one left at home in the hall, save Brage, who sat on the high bench, and the queen who was hidden there covered with clothes. Laf was sitting in the high seat playing with a golden ring, and Heah-mund and Gar-mund were down in the straw on the floor. They <pb id=pb277a n=277>went up to Laf and shoved him out of the high seat and took [all] his golden ring from him; then he fell a-weeping. Then Brage stood up, and walked up to where the queen lay, and struck her clothes with his staff, and said these verses. [See Ld. II. ch. 17.] Then Hag-ny exchanged back the boys with the bondwoman. But when king Heor came home, she brought the boys to him and said that they were his sons. The king answers, &lsquo;Take them away!&rsquo; said he, &lsquo;I never saw such <hi rend=sc>HELL-SKINS</hi>.&rsquo; They were both called so ever after. They were doughty men of might, and there is a great kin come of them in Iceland. Thore of Asp-hillock was the son of Heah-mund. Thence are come the <hi rend=sc>Asp-hillock-men</hi>. Gar-mund Hell-skin took Mid-fell&apos;s-strand in Broad-frith as his settlement. Yre was the name of his daughter, and thence is a great kindred come.


<p lang=en-UK n=6>[<hi rend=sc>Here endeth Book I.</hi>]


</div3>



<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<pb id=pb278 n=278>
<div0 id=bk2 n=II>
<head type=label>BOOK II.</head>

<head>THE OLD CONSTITUTION.</head>

<p>This book is made up of records, by Are or his contemporaries, of the history of the old law, custom, and constitutions down to his day, and as far back as the memory of man then ran.


<p><hi rend=sc>Section 1.</hi> The little Islendinga-book, <hi lang=la>Libellus Islandorum</hi>, as Are calls it himself, a brief abridgment of Icelandic history written to the order of the two Bishops, Thorlac and Ketil. It was, we think, first written in Latin, and afterwards literally translated into the vernacular tongue by some clerk; the Latin original is lost, yet the translation, being close, gives the exact work as nearly as may be.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 2.</hi> Fragments relating to primitive law and old customs, which are probably taken in great part from some scroll of Are, in part from other sources, glosses and the like, written down in his day.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 3.</hi> Bits of early law and customs of the Icelandic Commonwealth, picked out of the later codices known as <hi>Grágás</hi>, as illustrative of the oldest constitutional law.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 4.</hi> The chapter in Nial&apos;s Saga which tells of the formation of the Fifth Doom <hi>or</hi> Court.




<pb id=pb279 n=279>
<div1 n=1 id=s2.1>
<head lang=la>§ 1. LIBELLUS ISLANDORUM</head>


<p>It is most fit that this book, like the last, should begin with Are&apos;s work, for it is desirable in every way to emphasize our debt to him for the mass of <hi>political</hi> and <hi>legal</hi> as well as the <hi>historical</hi> and <hi>genealogical</hi> information we have of the heathen days. His attitude towards the old faith is indeed singular, religious but not ecclesiastical&mdash;a sober, curt, matter-of-fact relation of heathen forms and ceremonies, witchcraft and crime, singular to behold in a mediæval writer. The colourless words &lsquo;sid&rsquo; and &lsquo;forn,&rsquo; which he applies to heathen customs and ways, proclaim the impartiality of his language. His records of heathen and Christian times are much like the log-books of two voyages&mdash;one to the Old World, one to the New. Such men have unluckily been rare. His position of course helped him: a priest himself, of high family, he could never for a moment be suspected of any leaning towards the <hi>old ways</hi>; while the duties required of a man in his station no doubt gave him that practical experience and sound knowledge of actual life so valuable to an historian.

<p>Our means of building up the text of this work consists of one vellum of the middle of the 12th century, thought, though wrongly, to be Are&apos;s autograph. It was extant in the year 1651, as appears from John Erlendsson&apos;s colophon on one of his two copies. Its later history is unknown: for it is unknown to all writers of early 17th century (Biorn, Arngrim). Nor do we know how, or by what accident it was shortly after lost. It must have been a beautiful and interesting MS., for John&apos;s best copy is evidently intended to reproduce the chief features of the original, an unique effort probably among the copyists of his day. His two copies are:&mdash;AM. 113 b, fol., the fair one, undated, which has been used for our text<note n=1 id=n279.1>Arne Magnusson annotates&mdash;&lsquo;This copy I acquired from Thord Johnson, but he had cut it out from a book belonging to Thorbiorg Vigfus&apos; daughter, his aunt (father&apos;s sister). It is the most accurate of all I have seen; none better is now I think left, since the vellum is lost. I call it &ldquo;Cod. A.&rdquo;&rsquo;</note>, marked A and Cd. here, the editor having made a letter-for-letter transcript in 1884. The other above mentioned is numbered AM. 113 a, fol.<note n=2 id=n279.2>Of Cod. B he says&mdash;&lsquo;It was formerly owned by Sir Torfe Johnsson of B&oelig;, who, no doubt, had got it after the late Mag. Bryniolf. I got it from Thorlac, Bishop Thord&apos;s son; it had been at the head of a big volume which I cut up, separating the single treatises. I call it &ldquo;Cod. B&rdquo; or &ldquo;Baiensem&rdquo; or &ldquo;secundum.&rdquo;&rsquo;</note> Its colophon runs: &lsquo;These Schedæ [slips] of priest Are the historian and records are written in a book-fell <hi>or</hi> vellum, after his own handwriting <hi>or</hi> manuscript (as men suppose) in Willinga-holt, by priest John Ellendsson, anno dei 1651, Monday next after Dominicam Jubilate. John Ellendsson per manum propriam<note n=3 id=n279.3>It is curious that the colophon is attached to Cod. B, not A. It is the only instance I know of, of a colophon to John Erlendsson&apos;s many transcripts. One supposes that he meant this copy for <hi>himself</hi>, the other for the bishop. Note that he spells his own name with two <hi>ll&apos;s</hi>, not <hi>rl</hi>.</note>.&rsquo;

<pb id=pb280 n=280><p>Arne Magnusson, who owned A, has treated it rather disrespectfully, writing in various readings from the other sister copy in the margin and between the lines, and altering letters, spelling, etc., but the difference between his ink and priest John&apos;s serves to show where his pen has been.

<p>There are many other copies, viz. AM. 113 C-K fol., and AM. 365&ndash;8, 4to.&mdash;the last is a Latin translation of Arne&apos;s. They are all of the second half of the 17th century, all copies of John Erlendsson&apos;s A and B. They can be thus classified:&mdash;

<p>In the prologue a letter in the vellum must have been somehow injured, so as to make &lsquo;mis sagt&rsquo; (mis-said spelt probably with a single <hi>s</hi>) to look as &lsquo;nu sagt&rsquo; (now said). The best copies have the latter, the next best copies the former reading (by an easy emendation). They are thus divided:&mdash;

<p>Nu sagt: AM. 113 B, 113 A, fol.; 365, 366, 368, 4to. (lat. iam tradatur).

<p>Mis sagt:&mdash;113 K, 113 F, 113 E, 113 C, 113 G, 113 H, 113 I, Edit. 1688, Edit. Oxon.

<p>So much for the <hi lang=la>Libellus</hi> and its copies.

<p>But there are several long quotations preserved from another lost MS. or MSS., especially of the last two chapters (9&ndash;10) and of the 7th, containing Are&apos;s account of the conversion and the lives of the first two bishops. Of chs. 1&ndash;6 and 8 but little is preserved. This text is here marked A&ast;.

<p>From the last two chapters:&mdash;

<p>1. Chs. 13&ndash;14 of Lawman Sturla&apos;s Islendinga Saga (Sturl. i. pp. 204&ndash;6) contain large parts of the last two chapters of Libellus, yet in a different order, thus:&mdash;Libell. 9. 1, 8; 10. 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10&ndash;12; 9. 2, 9. Here marked A&ast; (S).

<p>2. The compiler of Christni Saga (Hawk or his authority) must have had in hand a copy of Libellus, or the latter part thereof, along with a continuation or appendix (our Mantissa); this, too, in somewhat different order, thus:&mdash;Libell. 9. 8, 1, 8; 10. 1, 3&ndash;9, 11. Here marked A&ast; (K).

<p>3. The author of Hungrvaca gives Libell. 10. 3, 5, 6. Marked A&ast; (H).

<p>4. Odd the Monk (in AM. 310) inserts a whole chapter from Islendinga-book, which he cites by name; all from the 7th chapter of Libellus, interlarded by pieces of the Ceartan tradition, of the Laxdæla Saga, and by one bit of Hialte&apos;s Saga (the Crosses), viz.:&mdash;Libell. 7. 1&ndash;8. Here marked A&ast; (OM).

<p>5. Bishop John&apos;s Saga, perhaps partly through Hungrvaca:&mdash;Libell. 9. 3, 4, 12.

<p>6. Landnama-book, Cd. S, has inserted the census:&mdash;Libell. 10. 6.

<p>So much for chs. 7, 9, 10.

<p>As for the other chapters our sources are less abundant; what we have observed is&mdash;

<p>7. The scribe of the big vellum called Watz-hyrna, in copying H&oelig;nsa-Þoris Saga, has inserted a large piece, in a terribly corrupt and paraphrased state, of Libell. ch. 5. Here marked A&ast; (Wh.). <pb id=pb281 n=281>A copy of Libellus&mdash;mutilated, blotted, and blurred (to judge from the gross errors)&mdash;seems to have been still extant, in the scribe&apos;s hands.

<p>8. A copy of Rimbegla (Roy. Libr., 1812, 12th century vell.) has preserved a whole piece of chapter 4; it is as if it had been taken from the archetype of our A (Libellus, not Liber), for it has the same error in this place. We have marked this A&ast; (1812).

<p>These extracts and texts are most important as a means of restoring Are&apos;s whole text. As was the use of the ancients in quoting or citing, they are often paraphrased, carelessly copied, and so on, yet, making allowance for all that, the impression one gathers is this, that the text of A&ast;, though essentially or often even word for word the same as that of A, was better executed. Something no doubt is due to the fact that Libellus has come down in one MS. only, wherein there are numerous evident scribe&apos;s errors and slips. John&apos;s copy has, we take it, added none, or next to none, to that stock of errors.

<p>We have picked out of this A&ast; text whatever has manifest marks of being Are&apos;s own work, omitted or misread in our A. All this is printed in brackets, so that the reader may take stock of it at a single glance. In two or three instances only, ch. 5. 1&ndash;3 (p. 293, notes 5, 8, 19), we have not entered it into the text, but left it in the foot-note.

<p>The chapter-divisions we have, for convenience, further broken into paragraphs.

<p>Earlier editions are: the Editio princeps, Scalholt black-letter, issued with Landnama-book, 1688; the Oxford edition, 1716; Copenhagen edition, 1830. John Sigurdsson&apos;s edition of 1843, with normal text and with fairly exact copy of A also. That of Th. Möbius, Kiel, 1869, is a reprint of the preceding.

<p>It was the life-long desire and study of Arne Magnusson to make a full and grand edition of this work, and to this end he made large collectanea during many years of his life. His canons of literary work were however so high, that he never accomplished his task. As John Olafsson says: &lsquo;In his book-writing he was very scrupulous not to deal with any vain <hi>or</hi> useless matter, and still more with what was not true. He used to say the world was over-full already of books nothing worth, even though he added none thereto. Yea, he was so hard to satisfy in this matter, that I have heard him say that a man might be well nigh all his life about composing one little book, and he would say that he had never meant to be a writer himself.... Yet he wrote a <hi>version</hi> and <hi>commentary</hi> on Are the historian&apos;s Islendinga Saga (<hi>sic</hi>), which were for the most part in loose leaves, and I noted in the lamented Arne that he was sorry that he had not had the book put into print before he died.&rsquo; By Islendinga Saga here John means Are&apos;s Libellus.

<p>The editor (in 1884) copied much of Arne&apos;s curious remarks and quaint discussions from these very loose leaves, still preserved in the <foreign lang=la>Additamenta</foreign> of his Library, small slips and little bits of paper thrust into a bundle, even two specimens of title-pages he drew up. The <pb id=pb282 n=282>specimens which we hope to print in some appendage, if not appendix, will show the acuteness and historic instinct, but also that over-scrupulosity which prevented Arne from ever being contented with his own judgment.

<p>While at Copenhagen, in the spring of 1887, a new view as to the original shape of Are&apos;s Libellus was opened to the editor. He was talking on Are and his records of early law with Dr. Finsen, when the latter said, &lsquo;It is curious that Are, who took so much interest in such matters, used such vague and untechnical terms respecting them in his Libellus. He cannot have been a lawyer, nor a gode even, nor can he have held a seat in the Court of Laws, for it is incredible that with legal experience or training he should not use the regular legal phraseology.&rsquo; He went on to mention a few instances (always from Libellus), e.g. Hann was &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>hofðinge at sokenne</foreign>&rsquo; (ch. 5. 1). &lsquo;No man of law,&rsquo; he said, &lsquo;could have expressed himself so.&rsquo; So again, &lsquo;Then was written Vigslóde, &ldquo;<foreign lang=is>oc mart annat í l&aolig;gom;</foreign>&rdquo; how vague and indistinct!&rsquo; and he added a few more examples of the kind.

<p>Here was an observation that demanded further notice. Dr. Finsen&apos;s trained eye had detected for the first time a curious blot in the Libellus. But how may the reason for this blot be discovered? Are, even should we allow that he were neither lawyer nor gode, must surely have heard and known the regular legal terminology of his days. One need not be an M. A. of Oxford to know that Oriel is ruled by a Provost, while the Head of Balliol is a Master: any unmatriculated tradesman will know so much, and laugh at any mistaken use of these terms. In an early state of society (as among school-boys with us) the misuse of technical language is a ridiculous and indecent thing, ever carefully avoided. We have, too, no such mistakes or slips in any other of Are&apos;s works: Landnama-book is full of accurate and regular phraseology on law matters. There must be some other key to the puzzle than the supposition that Are was ignorant.

<p>As Dr. Finsen was speaking, the idea flashed across the editor&apos;s mind that Are was thinking of Latin phrases, trying to choose words as near them as possible<note n=1 id=n282.1><foreign lang=is>aðile = hofðinge</foreign> = Lat. <hi lang=la>princeps</hi>, set me first thinking.</note>; but on getting back to England, thinking the matter over, he perceived that a more thorough hypothesis than this was needed,&mdash;that the only way to account for the whole phenomena was to believe that <hi>Libellus was composed originally in Latin</hi>; that then it was given to the bishops; that <hi>from this Latin a vernacular version was afterwards made</hi>, not by Are, but keeping close to his Latin, and that this vernacular version came down in one old MS., whence our Libellus MSS. and citations are derived.

<p>Such an hypothesis seems at first startling and complicated, but the evidence, whether external or internal, confirms it so absolutely and so consistently as to give one confidence in putting it forth. Let us look at the evidence bit by bit.

<pb id=pb283 n=283><p>The book itself&mdash;to one who reads it without prepossession, and purged of that film of accepted traditionalism which blinds a man and prevents him from seeing the obvious fact&mdash;is of strangely unfamiliar type and diction. Its whole framework and base of composition is not only unlike those with which the Icelandic classics have rendered us familiar, but widely different to those of acknowledged and evident works by Are himself&mdash;Landnama-book, and those parts of Eyrbyggia and of the Kings&apos; Lives that bear his mark. The <hi>framework</hi> of the book is Latin, preface, chapter-divisions, and so on. The build and syntax of the sentences is Latin and unidiomatic; see, for instance, ch. 1. 1, the long-drawn clause. There is a lack of pithy, homely, natural phrase, a weakness of construction, a kind of helplessness in expression, an employment of strange neologisms (<foreign lang=is>óliúgfróð</foreign>, 1. 1), a vagueness of statement, all characteristics alien to the brief, clear, precise, and at the same time sympathetic phraseology of the great historian. Marks of Latin origin are even yet apparent&mdash;the <hi>title</hi>, the heading of the chapter-list, <hi lang=la>Incipit Libellus Islandorum</hi>; <hi lang=la>In hoc codice continentur capitula</hi>; words like <hi lang=la>rex</hi>, <hi lang=la>obiit</hi>, <hi lang=la>secundus</hi><note n=1 id=n283.1>The oldest copies of Annals (Royal Libr., Sturl. ii. 348 sqq.) denote the Law-speaker by a Latinized form, &lsquo;legifer.&rsquo; Who coined that word?</note>, and the like (never met with in the regular Icelandic classic composition); forms like &lsquo;Norueg,&rsquo; which, as noticed below, reproduce the ecclesiastical &lsquo;Norwegia,&rsquo; and curious unidiomatic phrases and words which fall naturally and easily back into the Latin they suggest.

<p>Books are not even now-a-days wholly purposeless, and in old days they have their purpose clearly expressed in their whole construction. In Iceland in Are&apos;s days a writer had one of two objects&mdash;either <hi>technical</hi> instruction, for which the Law Scrolls were written down, or the <hi>pleasure and delight</hi> of the reader, for which the great bulk of the classics of Iceland was composed&mdash;the Sagas or Histories, and especially Are&apos;s own records of old days, stories of the Settlers, and the like. Now Libellus is not composed for entertainment, nor is it a technical treatise; it is rather a sketch of the scope of a <hi>report</hi>, designed to give to persons necessarily ignorant of the subject-matter a broad general view of the Icelandic state and its brief history. It is a copy, as the author tells us himself, of the third part of his Liber, made for the bishops <hi>at their request</hi>, shown to Sæ-mund (the leading ecclesiastic of the day next to the two bishops, taught abroad, and more familiar probably with this kind of writing than Are himself could be), and returned, apparently with suggestions for improvement, to the writer. Now why did the bishops want this book, and give such trouble to its correction? It was not for their own use; they would have got more profitable information and fuller from Are&apos;s Landnama-book and traditional records. Is it not likely that they wished to send it abroad, that they had a mind to give the archbishop, or some other influential friend <pb id=pb284 n=284>abroad, an account of their island, its history and state? To fulfil this purpose it must be in <hi>Latin</hi>.

<p>Can we get any light from contemporary events which may enable us to fix the <hi>occasion</hi> for which Libellus was composed? It would seem so. The chief event of real import at the time was the passing of the Christian Law Section in c. 1125 (an event already preceded by the passing of the Tithe Law in 1096 by the influence of bishop Gizor, priest Sæ-mund, and law-speaker Mark).

<p>The colophon of the Christian Law Section runs thus: &lsquo;So did they&mdash;bishop Thor-lac and bishop Ketil, by the counsel of archbishop Ozor and of priest Sæ-mund and many other clerks&mdash;establish the Christian Law that hath now been set forth and declared<note n=1 id=n284.1><p>&lsquo;<foreign lang=is>Svá setto þeir Þorlacr byscop oc Cetill byscop, at ráðe Autzorar erki-byscops oc Sæmundar [prestz<note n=A id=n284.A><ab type=textRef>prestz]</ab> add. AM. 135, 4to.</note>] oc margra kenni manna annarra, Cristinna laga þótt sem nu vas tínt oc upp sagt.</foreign>&rsquo; The text of the colophon, still extant in eight vellums, is given in Finsen I<hi rend=sup>a</hi>. 36; II. 45; III. 41, 133, 147, 182, 222, 266, 291.

<p>The enactment of the Tithe Law (Libell. 10. 3) was effected by bishop Gizor (there was yet no bishop of Holar), Sæ-mund, and Mark the law-speaker. The Tithe Law, though older in date, is in all MSS. but one appended to the Christian Law.

<p>There are nine MSS. of the Christian Law Section; one is defective at the end, and the colophon missing; in six the colophon observes the order, &lsquo;Bishop Ketil and Bishop Thorlac.&rsquo; Codex Regius itself reads this way. The other two MSS., Stadaholensis and its companion AM. 181 chart, observe the order given above, &lsquo;Bishop Thorlac and Bishop Ketil.&rsquo; The reason for this we take to be that the bulk of our copies belong to the northern diocese, Codex Regius among them, while the southern, western, and eastern copies of the Scalholt diocese would read like Stadaholensis, and give the precedence to their own bishop, whom also Are puts first, living in the west as he did in Thorlac&apos;s see. So in the dedication pedigree, the two pair of bishops, the two departed ones, and then the two living ones, are each given in the same order, Scalholt first, then Holar. The precedence undoubtedly in law belonged to Scalholt as the older diocese and mother-see as it were. We have more copies from the North, because the strict observance of the old law lasted till late in the 14th century in the northern see; hence all our 14th-century copies are northern.</note>.&rsquo;

<p>The similarity of this passage with that of Are&apos;s preface to Libellus with regard both to <hi>time</hi> and <hi>persons</hi> is obvious and striking. The bishops and Sæ-mund occur in both, but with Are the historian added in one case, and archbishop Ozor in the other. Have we not here a key to the whole transaction? Was not the treatise ordered by the bishops and revised by them and Sæ-mund, to be sent with a copy of the Christian Law to Ozor, who was the first archbishop of Lund and the first Northern primate? A careful account of a part of his province would necessarily be very welcome to him, and would answer the same purpose as the Report of a Royal Commission would now-a-days.

<p>Can we fix the date more nearly? Ozor was consecrated in 1104, Thor-lac in 1118, and Ketil in 1122. Sae-mund died in June, 1133, aged 77, and Thor-lac had predeceased him in February the same year. We are thus brought to some date between 1123 and 1132, and we can have little doubt but that such sweeping reforms and such vigorous <pb id=pb285 n=285>action as the passing of the Christian Law imports, were the work of the beginning rather than the end of the bishop&apos;s reign, and when Sæ-mund was still vigorous enough to take an active part in supporting them.

<p>Hence somewhere about 1125 would be a likely date.

<p>The necessity for the revision by the bishops and Sæ-mund is explained by consideration of the purport of the work. The genealogies might smack of heathendom, the Lives of the Kings were exotic matter, and hence their omission; which the additions were (þar viðr auca, es nú es gorr sagt) we cannot tell, the first draft being lost.

<p>Are would be 58 years old in 1125, a man well known for his historical work and learning, and hence the natural person to be asked to supply the record the bishops wanted to send abroad with their copy of the Christian Law.

<p>From Are&apos;s Latin some scribe (one of the bishops&apos; chaplains probably) put the document into the vernacular before it was sent away, and this copy was most likely kept in the registry of Scala-holt or Holar. That this was not done under Are&apos;s eye is evident from the lack of technicality in the phrases and style.

<p>This scribe was a clerk no doubt, who knew Latin but not law, and he had the difficult task of putting Are&apos;s technical phrases expressed in Latin of the type Bæda uses, we may suppose, into such apt Icelandic as he could guess at. In the process Are&apos;s concrete term vanishes, and a mere abstract or general term more or less fitting takes its place.

<p>The discrepancy between the Libellus and the rest of Are&apos;s work in style, vocabulary, and arrangement is absolute, such as the difference of purpose and the process of reversion or retranslation through which the former has passed could alone satisfactorily, we believe, explain.

<p>Our A confessedly represents <hi lang=la>Libellus</hi>, not Liber. But how about A&ast;? A comparison of the test words, or technical words, points to an identity of both texts. Only A&ast; has reached us in very paraphrastic condition, but this must be put to the account of the scribes or writers who quoted. Word for word citations, such as in modern works, were unknown to the ancients. There is no necessity of any far-fetched or complicated theory to account for the few words dropped out or inserted in them; the important fact is that they contain no statement the ground for which is not to be seen in the existing Libellus text, a text which is evidently, as we have noticed, derived from a MS. that must have stood in very close relationship to the original archetype.

<p>As for the Liber, it was probably cancelled: the two parts of it&mdash;the Genealogies and Kings&apos; Lives&mdash;we have, at least in substance, and probably in far fuller detail, in the Book of Settlements and the Book of Kings. The third part, as corrected, is our present Libellus.

<p>Latin books had a poor chance of survival in Iceland. They were not copied, hence they perished. For example, Sæ-mund&apos;s Lives of Kings, Odd&apos;s Life of Tryggvason, Gun-laug&apos;s Life of Bishop John of Holar are all gone, only leaving traces in the vernacular. How much <pb id=pb286 n=286>more has been destroyed without a sign we cannot tell. Are&apos;s original Latin text must be sought at that precious storehouse of the history of Christendom&mdash;the Vatican itself, whither a copy may possibly still lurk, spared from the destruction that has overtaken many early documents.

<p>The fact that no trace of Libellus or other Icelandic documents relating to Ozor&apos;s time are to be found in Lund itself, speaks for the terrible destruction of documents during the turbulent times of Danish history that preceded the Reformation. Moreover in 1234 the palace (stadr) of Lund was destroyed by fire [Icel. Ann. and Ann. Sturl. ii. 372], an ominous date for our Libellus.

<p>The respective dates of Liber and Libellus we have touched on above. We had once, in 1878, drawn a different conclusion, based on <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 8. b; but that clause is a manifest gloss, absent in A&ast; (S, K), put in after the book was finished; as it stands it cuts in two the paragraph about Bergthor in an impossible way. It therefore proves nothing as to the date of Libellus. We should date the Liber about 1123 or 1124, for it was dedicated to Bishop Ketil, who was not consecrated till 1122. (See for dates of Law-speakers and Bishops of Iceland, the Sturlunga, Oxford, ii. 469 and 470.) But upon the date of Liber depends that of the Libellus (dedicated, too, as the pedigrees at the end show, to the same bishops, and re-issued at their and Sæ-mund&apos;s instance). There need, we hold, be no long interval between the two issues&mdash;a couple of years would answer all purposes.

<p>The book comprises a prologue, with a genealogy that supplies to some extent the main dates; then table of contents, and body of ten chapters, followed by an epilogue which stands in lieu of a dedication of compliment to the two bishops; and it is completed by the pedigree and name of the author, which serves the same purpose as the title-page in a modern book.

<p>The little genealogy, Prologue 2, is a gloss, we believe; it could hardly have been written by the writer of the first phrases of the first chapter.

<p>John Erlendsson&apos;s autotype had the form &lsquo;Norwegh&rsquo; throughout with the &lsquo;w.&rsquo; This is a Latinism, for though it always survived in England, being there a survival of Norse older than our Sagas, the &lsquo;w&rsquo; form died in the North in the 10th century. It remains in the Homily-book, and the old fragment of Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Life by Odd the Monk; in all these instances it is an Eccles. Latin reminiscence.

<p>&lsquo;Schedæ&rsquo; is the title given to Libellus in edit. 1688 and Oxon. 1712; by Arne Magnusson, d. 1730, and Bp. Finn in 1772. John Erlendsson in the colophon to his copy of 1651, we believe, coined this title. The author himself called it <hi lang=la>Libellus Islandorum</hi>, in distinction from the earlier issue, <hi lang=la>Liber Islandorum</hi>, or <hi lang=is>Islendinga-bóc</hi>. Hence it is not strictly correct, as modern authors use, to call this shorter second issue &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>Islendinga-bóc</foreign>.&rsquo;


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb287 n=287>
<div2 lang=is rend="toc-head(Islandic Text)">

<div3 id=prologus lang=is rend="align-with(en.prologus)">
<head>[PROLOGUS.]</head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a287.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Islendinga-bóc g&oelig;rða-ec fyrst byscopom órom Þórláke <anchor id=a287.2>oc Katle, oc sýndac b&oelig;ðe þeim oc Sæmunde preste. <anchor id=a287.3>En með þvi at þeim lícaðe svá at hava eða þar viðr auca, <anchor id=a287.4>þá skrifaða-ec þessa of et sama far, fyr útan Ættar-t&aolig;lo<note place=apparatus id=an287.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Attar-, Cd.</note> oc <anchor id=a287.5>Conunga-æve; oc iócc því es mer varð síðan cunnara, oc nú es<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a287.6>g&oelig;rr sagt á þesse an á þeirre. En hvatke es mis-sagt es í fr&oeacute;ðom <anchor id=a287.7>þessom þá es scyllt at hava þat helldr es sannara reynesc.

<p n=2><anchor id=a287.8><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>2. Halfdan Hvítbeinn Upplendinga conungr, son Óláfs Tré&shy;telgjo <anchor id=a287.9>Svia-conungs, vas faðer Eysteins Fretz, f&aolig;ðor Halfdanar <anchor id=a287.10>ens Milda oc ens Matar-ílla, f&aolig;ðor Goðr&oelig;ðar Veiðe-conungs,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a287.11>f&aolig;ðor Halfdanar ens Svarta, f&aolig;ðor Harallz ens Hárfagra, es fyrstr <anchor id=a287.12>varð þess cyns einn conungr at &aolig;llom Norvege.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>

<p n=3><anchor id=a287.13><hi lang=la>In hoc codice continentur capitula.</hi>

<list>
    <item>Frá Íslannz bygð, I.
    <item>Frá Lannáms-m&aolig;nnom, II, oc laga-setníng.
    <item>Frá Alþingis-setning, III.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>
    <item>Frá Misseres-tale, IIII.
    <item>Frá Fiórðunga-deild, V.
    <item>Frá Gr&oelig;nlannz bygð, VI.
    <item>Frá því es Cristne kom á Ísland, VII.
    <item>Frá byscopom útlendom, VIII.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>
    <item>Frá Ísleife byscope, IX.
    <item>Frá Gizore byscope, X.
</list>


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 id=en.prologus lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head><hi>Prologus.</hi></head>

<p n=1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>The Book of the Men of Iceland</hi> I first made for our bishops Thor-lac and Ketil, and showed both to them and to Sæ-mund the priest. And with as much of it as they wished to have thus or to add thereto. I have written also this one of the same without the Genealogies and the Lives of the Kings. And I added to it as much as had afterwards become better known to me, and it is now more clearly said in this than in that other. And as to whatever be mis-said in this history, it is right to hold rather that which shall be proved more true.

<p n=2><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>2. Half-dan White-leg, king of the Up-land-men, son of An-laf Tree-cutter, king of the Swedes, was father of Aistan Fret, father of Half-dan the Bounteous and the Ill-feeder, father of God-fred the Hunter-king, father of Half-dan the Swart, father of Harold the Fair-hair, who first of this kin became sole king over all Norway.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>

<p n=3>In this treatise are contained the headings:&mdash;Of the Settlement of Iceland, I; of the Men of the Settlement, and the setting up of the Laws <hi>or</hi> Constitution, II; of the setting up of the All-moot, III; of the Calendar, IV; of the Parting of the Quarters, V; of the Settlement of Greenland, VI; of how Christendom came to Iceland, VII; of Foreign Bishops, VIII; of Bishop Is-laf, IX; of Bishop Gizor, X.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb288 n=288>
<div3 id=islandorum lang=is rend="align-with(en.islandorum)">
<head lang=la>INCIPIT LIBELLUS ISLANDORUM.</head>


<p n=1.1><anchor id=a288.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Ísland bygðesc fyrst or Norvege á d&aolig;gom Harallz <anchor id=a288.2>ens Hárfagra, Halfdanar sonar ens Svarta: í þann <anchor id=a288.3>tíð,&mdash;at ætlon oc t&aolig;lo þeirra Teitz fóstra míns, þess mannz es ec <anchor id=a288.4>cunna spacastan, sonar Ísleifs byscops; oc Þórkels f&aolig;ðor-bróðor <anchor id=a288.5>míns, Gellis sonar, es langt munðe fram; oc Þóríðar Snorra dóttor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a288.6>Goða, es bæðe vas marg-sp&aolig;c oc óliúg-fróð&mdash;es Ívarr, Ragnars <anchor id=a288.7>son Loðbrócar, lét drepa Eadmund enn Helga Engla-conung. <anchor id=a288.8>En þat vas dccclxx [vetra]<note place=apparatus id=an288.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vetra]</ab> om. Cd.</note> epter burð Cristz, at því es ritið es <anchor id=a288.9>í S&aolig;go hans.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a288.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ingolfr hét maðr Nor&oeacute;nn, es sannlega es sagt, at f&oeacute;re fyrst<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a288.11>þaðan til Íslannz, þá es Haralldr enn Hárfagre vas xvj vetra <anchor id=a288.12>gamall. En í annat sinn f&aoacute;m vetrom síðarr. Hann bygðe suðr <anchor id=a288.13>í Reykjar-víc,&mdash;þar es Ingolfs-h&aolig;fðe callaðr, fyr austan Minþacs-eyre, <anchor id=a288.14>sem hann com fyrst á land: en þar Ingolfs-fell fyr vestan <anchor id=a288.15>Olfoss-&aoacute; es hann lagðe sína eigo á síðan. Í þann tíð vas Ísland<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a288.16>viðe vaxet í miðle fiallz oc fi&aolig;ro.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a288.17><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þá vóro her menn Cristner þeir es Norðmenn calla Papa. En <anchor id=a288.18>þeir fóro síðan á braut, af þvi at þeir vildo eige vesa her við heiðna <anchor id=a288.19>menn: oc léto epter b&oeacute;cr Írscar, oc biollor, oc bagla: af því <anchor id=a288.20>mátte scilja at þeir vóro menn Írscer.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb289 n=289><p n=1.4><anchor id=a289.1><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En þá varð f&aolig;r manna mikil mioc út hingat úr Norvege, til <anchor id=a289.2>þess unz conungrenn Haralldr bannaðe, af þvi at hónom þótte <anchor id=a289.3>land-auðn nema. Þá sættosc þeir á þat, at hverr maðr scylde <anchor id=a289.4>gialda conunge fimm aura, sá es eige være frá því skiliðr, oc <anchor id=a289.5>þaðan f&oeacute;re hingat.&mdash;En þat es sagt at Haralldr være lxx vetra<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a289.6>konungr, oc yrðe áttr&oeacute;ðr.&mdash;Þau hafa upph&aolig;f vereð at gialde því <anchor id=a289.7>es nu es kallað land-aurar. En þar gallzc stundom meira, en <anchor id=a289.8>stundom minna; unz Óláfr enn Digre g&oelig;rðe scýrt at hverr maðr <anchor id=a289.9>scyllde giallda conunge halfa m&aolig;rk sá es f&oeacute;re á miðle Norvegs <anchor id=a289.10>ok Íslannz, nema conor, eða þeir menn es hann næme frá.&mdash;Svá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a289.11>sagðe Þórkell oss Gellis sun.

<p n=2.1><anchor id=a289.12><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Hrollaugr, son R&aolig;g<hi>n</hi>vallz iarls á M&oeacute;re, bygðe <anchor id=a289.13>austr á Síðo&mdash;þaðan ero Síðo-menn comner.

<p><anchor id=a289.14>Ketilbi&aolig;rn, Ketils son, maðr Nor&oeacute;nn, bygðe suðr at Mosfelle <anchor id=a289.15>eno &OElig;fra&mdash;þaðan ero Mosfellingar comner.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p><anchor id=a289.16>Qðr, dótter Ketils Flatnefs Hersis Nor&oelig;ns, bygðe vestr í Breiða-firðe&mdash;þaðan <anchor id=a289.17>ero Breiðfirðingar comner.

<p><anchor id=a289.18>Helge enn Magre, Nor&oeacute;nn, son Eyvindar Austmannz, bygðe <anchor id=a289.19>norðr í Eyja-firðe&mdash;þaðan ero Eyfirðingar comner.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a289.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En þá es Ísland vas víða bygt orðet, þá hafðe maðr Austr&oeacute;nn<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a289.21>fyrst l&aolig;g út hingat ur Norvege, sa es Ulfliótr hét.&mdash;Svá sagðe <anchor id=a289.22>Teitr oss&mdash;oc vóro þá Ulfliótz l&aolig;g c&aolig;lloð. Hann vas faðer <anchor id=a290.1><pb id=pb290 n=290>Gunnars, es Diúpd&oeacute;ler &apos;ro komner frá í Eyja-firðe. En þau vóro <anchor id=a290.2>flest sett at því sem þá vóro Gola-þings-l&aolig;g, eða r&aoacute;ð Þórleifs ens <anchor id=a290.3>Spaca H&aolig;rða-Cára sonar vóro til, hvar við scyllde auca, eða af <anchor id=a290.4>nema, eða annan veg setja.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a290.5><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ulfliótr vas austr í Lóne. En svá es sagt at Grímr Geitscor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a290.6>være fóst-bróðer hans, sá es cannaðe Ísland alt at ráðe hans áðr <anchor id=a290.7>Alþinge være átt. En hónom fecc hverr maðr pening á lande <anchor id=a290.8>her; en hann gaf þat fé síðan til hofs<note place=apparatus id=an290.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hofs]</ab> emend.; hofa A, original possibly read hofs á þinge.</note>.


<p n=3.1><anchor id=a290.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Alþinge vas sett at ráðe Ulfliótz oc allra lannz-manna <anchor id=a290.10>þar es nú es. En áðr vas þing á Kialar-nese, þat es<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a290.11>Þórsteinn, Ingolfs son Lannáma-mannz, faðer Þórkels Mána L&aolig;g&shy;s&aolig;go-mannz <anchor id=a290.12>hafðe þar, oc h&aolig;fðingjar þeir es at því hurfo.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a290.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En maðr hafðe secr orðet of þræls-morð eða leysings, sá es <anchor id=a290.14>land átte í Blá-scógom: hann es nefndr Þórer Croppin-skegge. <anchor id=a290.15>En dóttor-sonr hans es callaðr Þórvalldr Croppin-skegge, sá es fór<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a290.16>síðan í Austfi&aolig;rðo, oc brennde þar inne Gunnar bróðor sínn.&mdash;Svá <anchor id=a290.17>sagðe Hallr Ór&oeacute;kio son.&mdash;En sá hét Colr es myrðr vas: við <anchor id=a290.18>hann es cennd geá sú es þar es colloð síðan Cols geá, sem hræen <anchor id=a290.19>fundosc. Land þat varð síðan allz-herjar-fé. En þat l&aolig;gðo lannz-menn <anchor id=a290.20>til Alþingis neyzlo. Af því es þar almenning at viða til Alþingis<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a290.21>í scógom; oc á heiðom hage til hrossa hafnar.&mdash;Þat sagðe Ulf&shy;heðenn <anchor id=a290.22>oss.

<pb id=pb291 n=291><p n=3.3><anchor id=a291.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Svá hava oc spacer menn sagt, at á lx vetra yrðe Ísland <anchor id=a291.2>al-bygt, svá at eige være meirr síðan.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a291.3><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Því nær tóc Hramn l&aolig;gs&aolig;go, Hængs sonr lannáma-mannz, <anchor id=a291.4>næstr Ulflióte, oc hafðe xx sumor. Hann vas úr Rangár-hverfe. <anchor id=a291.5>Þat vas lx vetra epter dráp Eadmundar konungs, vetre<note place=apparatus id=an291.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> vetrum, Cd.</note> eða tveim<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a291.6>áðr Haralldr enn Hárfagre yrðe dauðr, at t&aolig;lo spacra manna.

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a291.7><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þórarenn Raga-bróðer, son Oleifs Hialta, tóc l&aolig;gs&aolig;go næstr <anchor id=a291.8>Hramne, oc hafðe &aolig;nnor xx (sumor<note place=apparatus id=an291.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sumor]</ab> om. Cd. -firþer, Cd.</note>). Hann vas Borgfirzcr.

<p n=4.1><anchor id=a291.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Þat vas oc, þá es ener sp&aolig;costo menn á lande her <anchor id=a291.10>h&aolig;fðo taleð í tveim misserom fióra daga ens fiórða<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a291.11>hundraðs&mdash;þat verða vicor tvær ens sétta tegar, en m&aoacute;noðr tolf <anchor id=a291.12>þrit&oelig;g-náttar, oc dagar fiórer umb fram.&mdash;Þá mercðo þeir at sólar-gange, <anchor id=a291.13>at sumaret munaðe aptr til várs-ens. En þat cunne enge <anchor id=a291.14>maðr segja þeim, at dege einom vas fleira an heilom vicom gegnde <anchor id=a291.15>í tveim misserom: oc þat olle.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a291.16><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En maðr hét Þórsteinn Surtr. Hann vas Breiðfirðscr, sonr <anchor id=a291.17>Hallsteins, Þórolfs sonar Mostrar-skeggja landnáma-mannz, oc <anchor id=a291.18>Oscar Þórsteins dóttor ens Rauða: hann dreymðe þat, at hann <anchor id=a291.19>hugðesc vesa at L&aolig;gberge, þá es þar vas fiolment, oc vaca; en <anchor id=a291.20>hann hugðe alla menn aðra sofa. En síðan hugðesc hann sofna,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a291.21>en hann hugðe þá alla aðra vacna. Þann draum réð Osyfr Helga <anchor id=a291.22>son, móðor-faðer Gellis Þórkels sonar, svá, at aller menn mynde <anchor id=a292.1><pb id=pb292 n=292>þagse verða<note place=apparatus id=an292.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þagse verða]</ab> emend.; þegn varþ, Cd.; þegja, A&ast; (1812).</note> meðan hann mælte at L&aolig;gberge; en síðan es hann <anchor id=a292.2>þagnaðe, at þá mynde aller þat róma es hann hafðe mælt&mdash;en þeir <anchor id=a292.3>vóro báðer spaker menn mioc. En síðan es menn qvómo til þings, <anchor id=a292.4>þá leitaðe hann ráðs at L&aolig;gberge, at et siaunda hvert sumar <anchor id=a292.5>scyllde auca vico; oc freista hve þá hlýdde. En svá sem Osyfr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a292.6>réð draumenn, þá v&aolig;cnoðo aller menn við þat vel. Oc vas þá <anchor id=a292.7>þat þegar í l&aolig;g leitt at ráðe Þórkels Mána oc annarra spacra <anchor id=a292.8>manna.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a292.9><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> At rétto tale (ero) í hverjo áre fimm dagar ens fiórða hundraðs, <anchor id=a292.10>ef eige es hlaup-ár; en þá einom fleira. En at óro tale<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a292.11>verða fiórer. En þá es eycsc at óro tale et siaunda hvert ár<note place=apparatus id=an292.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ár]</ab> &lsquo;at&rsquo; <hi>or</hi> &lsquo;ar,&rsquo; Cd., but &lsquo;ár&rsquo; is meant.</note> vico, <anchor id=a292.12>en &oelig;ngo at hino, þá verða siau &aoacute;r saman iamn-l&aolig;ng at hv&aoacute;ro-tveggja. <anchor id=a292.13>En ef hlaup-&aoacute;r verða tvau á miðle þeirra es auca skal, <anchor id=a292.14>þat þarf auca et sétta.

<p n=5.1><anchor id=a292.15><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Þinga-deild mikel varð á miðle þeirra Þórðar Gellis,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a292.16>sonar Oleifs Feilans, úr Breiðafirðe, oc Od<hi>d</hi>z, þess es <anchor id=a292.17>kallaðr vas Tungo-Oddr, hann vas Borgfirðscr. Þórvalldr son <anchor id=a292.18>hans vas at brenno Þórkels Blunn-Ketils sonar með H&oeacute;sna-Þóre í <anchor id=a292.19>Ornolfs-dale. En Þórðr Gellir varð h&aolig;fðinge at s&aolig;kenne, af þvi at <anchor id=a292.20>Hersteinn, Þórkels son Blunn-Ketils sonar, átte Þórunne systor-dóttor<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a292.21>hans;&mdash;hon vas Helgo dótter oc Gunnars, syster Iófríðar es <anchor id=a292.22>Þórsteinn átte Egils son.&mdash;En þeir vóro sótter á þinge því es vas í <anchor id=a293.1><pb id=pb293 n=293>Borgar-firðe í þeim stað es síðan es callat Þing-nes. Þat vóro þá <anchor id=a293.2>l&aolig;g, at víg-sacar scyllde s&oeacute;kja á því þinge es næst vas vétt-va<hi>n</hi>ge. <anchor id=a293.3>En þeir b&aolig;rðosc þar, oc mátte þingeð eige heyjasc at l&aolig;gom. <anchor id=a293.4>Þár fell Þórolfr Refr, bróðer Alfs<note place=apparatus id=an293.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Alfs]</ab> &Ocedil;lfs, Cd. Gellis] Einn maðr fell af Odde en iii urðo miok sárer, add. A&ast; (Wh.).</note> í D&aolig;lom úr liðe Þórðar Gellis. <anchor id=a293.5>En síðan fóro sacarnar til Alþingis<note place=apparatus id=an293.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Alþingis]</ab> en þinget vas þá under Ármannz-felle, <hi>an aside</hi>, add. A&ast; (Wh.).</note>, oc b&aolig;rðosc þeir þar þá enn. Þá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a293.6>fello [vi]<note place=apparatus id=an293.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vi]</ab> add. A&ast; (Wh.).</note> menn úr liðe Oddz; enda varð secr hann H&oeacute;sna-Þórer, <anchor id=a293.7>oc drepenn síðan, oc fleire þeir (es) at brennonne vóro.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a293.8><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þá talðe Þórðr Geller t&aolig;lo umb at L&aolig;gberge hve ílla m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a293.9>gegnde, at fara í ócunn þing at s&oeacute;kja of víg, eða harma sína [at <anchor id=a293.10>reka]<note place=apparatus id=an293.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at reka]</ab> add. A&ast; (Wh.).</note>; oc talðe hvat hónom varð fyrer, áðr harm mætte því mále<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a293.11>til laga coma; oc qvað ymissa vandræðe m&oelig;ndo verða, ef eige <anchor id=a293.12>réðesc b&oeacute;tr á.

<p n=5.3><anchor id=a293.13><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þá vas landeno scipt í fiórðunga, sva at <hi rend=sc>III</hi> urðo þing í <anchor id=a293.14>hverjom fiórðunge; oc scyldo þingo-nautar eiga hvar sac-sócner <anchor id=a293.15>saman; nema í Norðlendinga fiórðunge vóro <hi rend=sc>IIII</hi>, af þvi at þeir<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a293.16>urðo eige á annat sátter. Þeir es fyr norðan vóro Eyja-fi&aolig;rð vildo <anchor id=a293.17>eige þangat s&oeacute;kja þingeð; oc eige í Scaga-fi&aolig;rð þeir es þar vóro <anchor id=a293.18>fyr vestan. En þó scylde i&aolig;fn dóm-nefna<note place=apparatus id=an293.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dóm-nefna]</ab> á alþinge, add. A&ast; (Wh.).</note> oc l&aolig;grétto-scipon úr <anchor id=a293.19>þeirra fiórðunge sem úr hverjom &aolig;ðrom<note place=apparatus id=an293.6><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&aolig;ðrom]</ab> Af því skal einn maðr þaðan <anchor id=a293.20>sitja fyrer forraðs goðorð, add. A&ast; (Wh.), corrupt; read&mdash;af því ero forn goðorð <anchor id=a293.21>Norðlendinga fiórðunge skerð, a <hi>kind</hi> of homoiotel. from &lsquo;fiórðunge,&rsquo; cp. Logretto <anchor id=a293.22>Þáttr.</note>. En síðan vóro sett <anchor id=a294.1><pb id=pb294 n=294>fiórðungar-þing.&mdash;Svá sagðe oss Ulfheðinn, Gunnars son, L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr.

<p n=5.4><anchor id=a294.2><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þórkell Máne, Þórsteins son, Ingolfs sonar, tóc l&aolig;gs&aolig;go epter <anchor id=a294.3>Þórarinn Raga-bróðor, oc hafðe <hi rend=sc>XV</hi> sumor.

<p n=5.5><anchor id=a294.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þá hafðe Þórgeirr at Liósa-vatne, Þórkels son, <hi rend=sc>XVII</hi> sumor.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=6.1><anchor id=a294.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> Land þat, es callat es Gr&oeacute;nland, fannsc oc bygðesc af <anchor id=a294.7>Íslande. Eirikr enn Rauðe hét maðr Breiðfir<hi>ð</hi>scr, <anchor id=a294.8>es fór út heðan þangat; oc nam þar land es síðan es callaðr <anchor id=a294.9>Eiriks-fi&aolig;rðr. Hann gaf nafn landeno, oc callaðe Gr&oeacute;n-land; <anchor id=a294.10>ok qvað menn þat myndo fýsa þangat farar, at landeð ætte nafn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a294.11>gótt.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a294.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þeir fundo þar manna-vister bæðe austr oc vestr á lande, oc <anchor id=a294.13>keipla-brot oc stein-smíðe: þat es af því má scilja, at þar hafðe <anchor id=a294.14>þess-conar þióð fareð, es Vínland hefer byggt, oc Gr&oeacute;nlendingar <anchor id=a294.15>calla Screlinga.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a294.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En þat vas es hann tóc byggva landeð, xiiii vetrom eða <hi rend=sc>XV</hi> <anchor id=a294.17>fyrr an Cristne qvæme her á Ísland, at því es sá talðe fyrer Þórkele <anchor id=a294.18>Gellis syne á Gr&oeacute;nlande es siálfr fylgðe Eirike enom Rauða út.

<p n=7.1><anchor id=a294.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Óláfr <hi>rex</hi> Tryggva son, Óláfs sonar, Harallz sonar <anchor id=a294.20>ens Hárfagra, com Cristne í Nor<hi>v</hi>eg oc á Ísland.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a294.21>Hann sende hingat til lannz prest þann es hét Þangbrandr [Sax&shy;nescan <anchor id=a294.22>at cyne]<note place=apparatus id=an294.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Saxn. at c.]</ab> add. A&ast; (OM).</note>, oc her kende m&aolig;nnom Cristne; oc scírðe þá <anchor id=a295.1><pb id=pb295 n=295>alla es við trú tóco. En Hallr á Síðo, Þórsteins son, [B&aolig;ðvars <anchor id=a295.2>sonar ens Hvíta af Vors, es l&aolig;nd nam í Alfta-firðe enom syðra, <anchor id=a295.3>hann]<note place=apparatus id=an295.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>B&aolig;ðvars sonar ... hann]</ab> add. A&ast; (OM).</note> lét scírasc snimhendis, oc Hiallte Sceggja sonr úr Þiórsár-dale; <anchor id=a295.4>oc Gizorr enn Hvíte Teitz son, Ketilbiarnar sonar frá Mos&shy;felle; <anchor id=a295.5>oc marger h&aolig;fðingjar aðrer. En þeir vóro þó fleire es í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a295.6>gegn mælto oc neitto. [En Þangbrandr com scipe síno í Alfta&shy;fi&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a295.7>oc vas at Þvátt-&aoacute; um vetrenn.]<note place=apparatus id=an295.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>En Þangbr ... vetrenn]</ab> add. A&ast; (OM).</note> En þá es hann hafðe her <anchor id=a295.8>vereð einn vetr eða tvá, þá fór hann á braut, oc hafðe veget her <anchor id=a295.9>tvá menn eða þriá, þá es hann h&aolig;fðo nítt. En hann sagðe <anchor id=a295.10>conungenom Óláfe, es hann com austr, allt þat es her hafðe yfer<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a295.11>hann gingið; oc lét &oelig;rvænt, at her m&oelig;nde cristnen<note place=apparatus id=an295.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>cristnen]</ab> cristni en, Cd.</note> tacasc. En <anchor id=a295.12>hann varð við þat reiðr mioc, oc ætlaðe at láta meiða eða drepa <anchor id=a295.13>ossa landa fyrer þá es þar vóro austr. En þat sumar et sama, <anchor id=a295.14>qvómo út heðan þeir Gizorr oc Hiallte, oc þógo þá undan við <anchor id=a295.15>conungenn, oc héto hónom umb-sýslo sínne til á nyja-leic, at her<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a295.16>yrðe enn við cristninne teket, oc léto ser eige annars v&aoacute;n an þat<note place=apparatus id=an295.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þat]</ab> þar, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a295.17>m&oelig;nde hlýða. En et næsta sumar efter fóro þeir austan, oc prestr <anchor id=a295.18>sá es Þórmoðr hét, oc qvómo þá í Vestmanna-eyjar, es x vicor <anchor id=a295.19>vóro af sumre, oc hafðe allt faresc vel at.&mdash;Svá qvað Teitr þann <anchor id=a295.20>segja es sialfr vas þar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a295.21><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þá vas þat mælt et næsta sumar áðr í l&aolig;gom, at menn scyllde <anchor id=a295.22>svá coma til Alþingis, es tio vicor være af sumre, en þangat til <anchor id=a295.23>qvómo (menn) vico fyrr.

<pb id=pb296 n=296><p n=7.3><anchor id=a296.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En þeir fóro þegar inn til megin-lannz, oc síðan til Alþingis; <anchor id=a296.2>oc g&aoacute;to at Hiallta, at hann vas efter í Laugar-dale með xii <anchor id=a296.3>mann; af því at hann hafðe áðr secr orðet fiorbaugs-maðr et næsta <anchor id=a296.4>sumar áðr á Alþinge of Goð-g&aoacute;. En þat vas til þess haft, at hann <anchor id=a296.5>qvað at L&aolig;gberge qviðling þenna:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a296.6>Vil ec ...<note place=apparatus id=an296.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> eige, Cd. (wrongly); Spare-ek eige, Niala.</note> goð g&oelig;yja: gr&oelig;y þyccer mer Fr&oelig;yja:
    <l><anchor id=a296.7>[Æ man annat-tveggja Óðenn gr&oelig;y eðr Fr&oelig;yja.]<note place=apparatus id=an296.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Æ man ... Fr&oelig;yja]</ab> add. A&ast; (OM).</note>
</lg>

<p n=7.4><anchor id=a296.8><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En þeir Gizorr fóro unz þeir qvómo í stað þann í hiá Olfoss&shy;vatne <anchor id=a296.9>es callaðr es Vellan-catla; oc g&oelig;rðo orð þaðan til þings<note place=apparatus id=an296.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þings]</ab> þingvallar, A&ast; (OM).</note>, at <anchor id=a296.10>á móte þeim scyllde coma aller fulltings-menn þeirra; af þvi at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a296.11>þeir h&aolig;fðo spurt, at andscotar þeirra vilde verja þeim víge þing-v&aolig;llenn. <anchor id=a296.12>En fyrr an þeir f&oeacute;re þaðan þá com þar ríðande Hiallte, <anchor id=a296.13>oc þeir es epter vóro með hónom. En síðan riðo þeir á þinget; <anchor id=a296.14>oc qvómo áðr á mót þeim frændr þeirra oc viner, sem þeir h&aolig;fðo <anchor id=a296.15>æst. En ener heiðno menn hurfo saman með alvæpne, oc hafðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a296.16>stórom nær<note place=apparatus id=an296.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>stórom nær]</ab> emend.; stor-ner, A&ast; (K); svá nær, Cd.</note>, at þeir mynde berjasc áðr viner hvárra-tveggja of <anchor id=a296.17>genge á miðle<note place=apparatus id=an296.5>áðr viner ... miðle] thus emend.; at of sa a miþli, Cd.</note>.

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a296.18><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> En annan dag epter gengo þeir Gizorr oc Hialte til L&aolig;gbergs, <anchor id=a296.19>oc b&aoacute;ro þar upp &oelig;rende sín. En svá es sagt, at þat bære frá hve <anchor id=a296.20>vel þeir mælto. En þat g&oelig;rðesc af því, at þar nefnðe annarr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a297.1><pb id=pb297 n=297>maðr at &aolig;ðrom vátta, oc s&aolig;gðosc hvárer úr L&aolig;gom við aðra, ener <anchor id=a297.2>Cristno menn oc ener heiðno, oc gingo síðan frá L&aolig;gberge.

<p n=7.6><anchor id=a297.3><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þá b&aoacute;ðo ener Cristno menn Hall á Síðo, at hann scyllde l&aolig;g <anchor id=a297.4>þeirra upp segja þau es Cristnenne scyllde fylgja. En hann leystesc <anchor id=a297.5>því undan við þá, at hann c&oelig;ypte at Þórgeire l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-manne<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a297.6>[halfre m&aolig;rc silfrs]<note place=apparatus id=an297.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>halfre m. s.]</ab> add. A&ast; (OM).</note>, at hann scyllde upp segja.&mdash;En hann vas enn <anchor id=a297.7>þá heiðenn.&mdash;En síðan es menn qvómo í búðer, þá lagðesc hann <anchor id=a297.8>niðr Þórgeirr, oc breidde feld sínn á sic, oc hvílðe þann dag allan, <anchor id=a297.9>oc nóttena efter, oc qvað ecci orð. En of morgonenn efter settesc <anchor id=a297.10>hann upp, oc g&oelig;rðe orð, at menn scylde ganga til L&aolig;gbergis.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=7.7><anchor id=a297.11><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> En þá hóf hann t&aolig;lo sína upp es menn qvómo þar, oc sagðe, at <anchor id=a297.12>hónom þótte þá comet hag manna í ónýtt efne, ef menn scyllde <anchor id=a297.13>eige hafa aller ein l&aolig;g á lande her; oc talðe fyrer m&aolig;nnom á <anchor id=a297.14>marga vega, at þat scyllde eige láta verða: oc sagðe at þat m&oelig;nde <anchor id=a297.15>at því ósætte verða, es vísa v&aoacute;n vas, at þær bar-smíðer g&oelig;rðesc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a297.16>á miðle manna es landeð eyddesc af. Hann sagðe frá því, at <anchor id=a297.17>conungar úr Norrege oc úr Danm&aolig;rco h&aolig;fðo haft ó-frið oc <anchor id=a297.18>orrostor á miðle sín langa tíð til þess unz lannz-menn [hvárs-tveggja]<note place=apparatus id=an297.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hvárs-tveggja]</ab> add. A&ast; (OM).</note> <anchor id=a297.19>g&oelig;rðo frið á miðle þeirra, þótt þeir villde eige. En þat <anchor id=a297.20>ráð g&oelig;rðesc svá, at af stundo sendosc þeir gersemar á miðle:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a297.21>enda héllt<note place=apparatus id=an297.3><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>héllt]</ab> helzt, A&ast; (OM).</note> friðr sá meðan þeir lifðo. &lsquo;En nu þyccer mer þat ráð,&rsquo; <anchor id=a297.22>qvað hann, &lsquo;at ver látem oc eige þá ráða es mest vilja í gegn <anchor id=a297.23>gangasc; oc miðlom svá m&aoacute;l á miðle þeirra, at hvárer-tveggjo<note place=apparatus id=an297.4><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> oc miðlomc svá mál við, A&ast; (OM). hvárer], hverer-, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a298.1><pb id=pb298 n=298>hafe nacqvat síns máls, oc h&aolig;fom aller ein l&aolig;g oc einn sið. Þat <anchor id=a298.2>mon verða satt, es<note place=apparatus id=an298.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es]</ab> <hi>read</hi> ef?</note> ver slítom sundr l&aolig;gen, at ver monom slíta <anchor id=a298.3>oc friðenn.&rsquo; En hann lauc svá síno mále, at hvárer-tveggjo i&aoacute;tto <anchor id=a298.4>því, at aller scyllde ein l&aolig;g hafa þau sem hann réðe upp at segja.

<p n=7.8><anchor id=a298.5><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þá vas þat mællt í l&aolig;gom, at aller menn scyllde Cristner vesa,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a298.6>oc scírn taca, þeir es áðr vóro óscírðer á lande her. En of barna <anchor id=a298.7>út-burð scylldo standa en forno l&aolig;g, oc of hrossa-keotz át: scylldo <anchor id=a298.8>menn blóta á laun ef villdo; en varða fiorbaugs-garðr ef v&aoacute;ttom <anchor id=a298.9>of qvæme við. En síðar f&aoacute;m vetrom vas sú heiðne af numen sem <anchor id=a298.10>&aolig;nnor.&mdash;Þenna atburð sagðe Teitr oss, at því es Cristne com á <anchor id=a298.11>Ísland.

<p n=7.9><anchor id=a298.12><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> En Óláfr Tryggva son fell et sama sumar, at s&aolig;go Sæmundar <anchor id=a298.13>prestz. Þá barðesc hann við Svein Harallz son Dana conung; oc <anchor id=a298.14>Óláf enn S&oeacute;nsca, Eirics son at Upps&aolig;lom Svia conungs; ok Eiric <anchor id=a298.15>es síðan vas iarl at Norvege H&ocedil;conar son. Þat vas <hi rend=sc>CXXX</hi> vetrom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a298.16>epter dráp Eadmundar; en <hi rend=sc>M</hi> epter burð Cristz at alþýðo tale.

<p n=8.1><anchor id=a298.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Þesse ero n&aolig;fn byscopa þeirra es vereð hafa á Íslande <anchor id=a298.18>útlender, at s&aolig;go Teitz.&mdash;Friðrecr com í heiðne her. <anchor id=a298.19>En þesser vóro síðan:&mdash;Biarnharðr enn Bócvíse v &aoacute;r: Colr f&aoacute; <anchor id=a298.20>&aoacute;r. Hroðolfr <hi rend=sc>XIX</hi> &aoacute;r. I&aolig;han enn Írske f&aoacute; &aoacute;r. Biarnharðr <hi rend=sc>XIX</hi> &aoacute;r.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a298.21>Heinrecr <hi rend=sc>II</hi> &aoacute;r.

<pb id=pb299 n=299><p n=8.2><anchor id=a299.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Enn qvómo her aðrer v, þeir es byscopar qvóðosc vesa: <anchor id=a299.2>Ornolfr oc Goðiscolcr. Oc <hi rend=sc>III</hi> Ermscer: Petrus, oc Abraham, oc <anchor id=a299.3>Stephanus.

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a299.4><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Grímr at Mosfelle, Svertings son, tóc l&aolig;gs&aolig;go epter Þórgeir; <anchor id=a299.5>oc hafðe ii sumor. En þá fecc hann lof til þess at Scapte<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a299.6>Þóroddz son hefðe, systor-son hans, af þvi at hann vas hás-mæltr <anchor id=a299.7>sialfr.

<p n=8.4><anchor id=a299.8><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Scapte hafðe l&aolig;gs&aolig;go xxvij sumor. Hann sette Fimtar-dóms-l&aolig;g; <anchor id=a299.9>oc þat, at enge vegande scyllde lýsa víg á hendr &aolig;ðrom <anchor id=a299.10>manne an ser; en áðr vóro her slíc l&aolig;g of þat sem í Norvege.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a299.11>Á hans d&aolig;gom urðo marger h&aolig;fðingjar oc ríkis-menn seker eða <anchor id=a299.12>land-flótta of víg eða bar-smíðer af ríkis s&aolig;com hans oc land-stiórn. <anchor id=a299.13>En hann andaðesc á eno sama áre oc Óláfr enn Digre <anchor id=a299.14>fell, Harallz son, Goðr&oelig;ðar sonar, Biarnar sonar, Harallz sonar <anchor id=a299.15>ens Hárfagra, <hi rend=sc>XXX</hi> vetrom síðarr an Óláfr felle Tryggva son.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=8.5><anchor id=a299.16><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þá tóc Steinn Þórgestz son l&aolig;g-s&aolig;go, oc hafðe iii sumor.

<p n=8.6><anchor id=a299.17><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þá hafðe Þórkell Tiorva son <hi rend=sc>XX</hi> sumor.

<p n=8.7><anchor id=a299.18><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þá hafðe Geller Bolverks son <hi rend=sc>IX</hi> sumor.

<p n=9.1><anchor id=a299.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Ísleifr, Gizorar son ens Hvíta, vas vígðr til byscops á <anchor id=a299.20>d&aolig;gom Harallz Norvegs conungs, Sigurðar sonar,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a299.21>Halfdanar<note place=apparatus id=an299.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Halfþanar, Cd.</note> sonar, Sigurðar sonar Hrísa, Harallz sonar ens Hárfagra.&mdash;En <anchor id=a299.22>es þat s&aoacute; h&aolig;fðingjar oc góðer menn, at Ísleifr vas myklo <anchor id=a300.1><pb id=pb300 n=300>nýtre an aðrer kenne-menn, þeir es á þvísa lande næðe, þá selldo <anchor id=a300.2>hónom marger sono sína til læringar, oc léto vígja til presta. Þeir <anchor id=a300.3>urðo síðan vígðer ii til byscopa: Collr es vas í Víc austr, oc <anchor id=a300.4>Ioan at Hólom.

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a300.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ísleifr átte iii sono; þeir urðo aller h&aolig;fðingjar nýter:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a300.6>Gizorr byscop; oc Teitr prestr, faðer Hallz; oc Þórvalldr<note place=apparatus id=an300.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórvalldr]</ab> A&ast; (S); Þorvallz, Cd.</note>. Teit <anchor id=a300.7>f&oeacute;dde Hallr í Hauka-dale, sá maðr, es þat vas al-mællt, at mill-dastr <anchor id=a300.8>være oc ágæztr at góðo á lande her ólærðra manna. Ec <anchor id=a300.9>com til Hallz vii vetra gamall, vetre epter þat es Geller Þórkels <anchor id=a300.10>son, f&aolig;ðor-faðer mínn oc fóstre, andaðesc; oc vase þar xiiii vetr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=9.3><anchor id=a300.11><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Gunnarr enn Space hafðe teket l&aolig;g-s&aolig;go þá es Geller lét af, <anchor id=a300.12>oc hafðe iii sumor.

<p n=9.4><anchor id=a300.13><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þá hafðe Colbeinn, Flosa son, vi (sumor). Þat sumar es <anchor id=a300.14>hann tóc l&aolig;g-s&aolig;go fell Haralldr <hi>rex</hi> á Englande.

<p n=9.5><anchor id=a300.15><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þá hafðe Geller í annat sinn iiii sumor.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=9.6><anchor id=a300.16><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þá hafðe Gunnarr í annat sinn i sumar.

<p n=9.7><anchor id=a300.17><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þá hafðe Sighvatr Surtz son, systor-son Colbeins, viii (sumor). <anchor id=a300.18>Á þeim<note place=apparatus id=an300.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeim]</ab> <hi>read</hi> hans?</note> d&aolig;gom com Sæmundr Sigfússon sunnan af Frac<hi>c</hi>lande <anchor id=a300.19>hingat til lannz, oc lét síðan vígjasc til prestz.

<p n=9.8><anchor id=a300.20><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Ísleifr vas vígðr til byscops þá es hann vas fimt&oelig;gr. Þá vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a300.21>Leo <hi>nonus</hi><note place=apparatus id=an300.3><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>nonus]</ab> emend., according to A&ast; (S); septimus, Cd.</note> Pave. En hann vas enn næsta vetr í Norvege, oc fór <anchor id=a300.22>síðan út hingat. En hann andaðesc í Scála-hollte, þá es hann <anchor id=a300.23>hafðe allz veret byscop iiii vetr oc <hi rend=sc>XX</hi>.&mdash;Svá sagðe Teitr oss.

<pb id=pb301 n=301><p>Þat vas á Dróttens-dege vi nóttom epter hátíð þeirra Pet<hi>t</hi>ars<note place=apparatus id=an301.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Petrs, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a301.1>ok P&ocedil;ls, lxxx vetra epter Óláfs fall Tryggva sonar. Þar vas ec þá <anchor id=a301.2>með Teite fóstra mínom, tolf vetra gamall.

<p n=9.9><anchor id=a301.3><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> En Hallr sagðe oss svá, es bæðe vas minnigr ok ólýgenn, oc <anchor id=a301.5>munðe sialfr þat es hann vas scírðr, at Þangbrandr scírðe hann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a301.6>þre-vetran. En þat vas vetre fyrr an Cristne være her í l&aolig;g teken. <anchor id=a301.7>En hann g&oelig;rðe bú þrít&oelig;gr, oc bió lxiiij vetr í Hauka-dale, oc <anchor id=a301.8>hafðe xciiij vetr þá es hann andaðesc. En þat vas of hótíð Martens <anchor id=a301.9>byscops á enom x<note place=apparatus id=an301.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á enom x]</ab> tio vetrom, A&ast; (S).</note> vetre epter andlát Ísleifs<note place=apparatus id=an301.3><ab type=textRef>Ísleifs]</ab> om. A; add. A&ast; (S); a little blank space left in Cd.</note> byscops.

<p n=10.1><anchor id=a301.10><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> Gizorr byscop, sonr Ísleifs, vas vígðr til byscops, at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a301.11>b&oeacute;n lannz-manna, á d&aolig;gom Óláfs conungs, Harallz <anchor id=a301.12>sonar, ii vetrom epter þat es Ísleifr andaðesc: þann vas hann <anchor id=a301.13>annan her á lande, en annan á Gautlande.&mdash;En þat vas namn hans <anchor id=a301.14>rétt<note place=apparatus id=an301.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þat ... rétt]</ab> thus A&ast; (S); en þa vas namn hans rett, Cd.</note>, at hann hét Gisr&oelig;ðr.&mdash;Svá sagðe hann oss.

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a301.15><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Márcus Sceggja son hafðe l&aolig;g-s&aolig;go næstr Sighvate, oc tóc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a301.16>þat sumar, es Gizorr byscop hafðe einn vetr vereð her á lande; en <anchor id=a301.17>fór með iiii sumor oc <hi rend=sc>XX</hi>. At hans s&aolig;go es scrifoð æve allra <anchor id=a301.18>l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-manna á bóc þesse, þeirra es vóro fyrer várt minne. <anchor id=a301.19>En hónom sagðe Þórarenn bróðer hans, oc Scegge faðer þeirra, <anchor id=a301.20>oc fleire spaker menn, til þeirra æve es fyrer hans minne vóro: at<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a301.21>því es Biarne enn Spake hafðe sagt, f&aolig;ðor-faðer þeirra, es munðe <anchor id=a301.22>Þórarenn l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mann oc vi aðra síðan.

<pb id=pb302 n=302><p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Gizorr byscop vas ástsælle af &aolig;llom lannz-m&aolig;nnom an hver<hi>r</hi> <anchor id=a302.1>maðr annarra, þeirra es ver vitom<note place=apparatus id=an302.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> vitam, Cd.</note> her á lande hafa vereð. Af ást-sælð <anchor id=a302.2>hans, oc af t&aolig;lom þeirra Sæmundar [prestz]<note place=apparatus id=an302.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>prestz]</ab> add. A&ast; (S).</note>, með umbráðe <anchor id=a302.3>Márcus l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz [oc fleire spakra manna]<note place=apparatus id=an302.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>oc fl. sp. m.]</ab> add. A&ast; (S).</note> vas þat í l&aolig;g <anchor id=a302.5>leitt, at aller menn [á lande her þeir es eige vóro frá numner]<note place=apparatus id=an302.4><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á lande ... numner]</ab> add. A&ast; (S).</note> t&aolig;lðo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a302.6>oc virðo allt fé sítt, oc sóro at rétt virt være, hvárt sem vas í <anchor id=a302.7>l&aolig;ndom eða í lausa-aurom, oc g&oelig;rðo tíund af síðan. Þat ero <anchor id=a302.8>miclar iartegner<note place=apparatus id=an302.5><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> iartecner (= iarte<hi rend=sc>G</hi>ner), Cd.</note> hvat hlýðner lannz-menn vóro þeim manne, es <anchor id=a302.9>hann com því framm, at fé alt vas virt með svar-d&aolig;gom<note place=apparatus id=an302.6><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> svar-þogom, Cd.</note>, þat es <anchor id=a302.10>á Íslande vas; oc landet sialft; oc tíunder af g&oelig;rvar; oc l&aolig;g á<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a302.11>l&aolig;gð, at svá scal vesa meðan Ísland es byggt.

<p n=10.4><anchor id=a302.12><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Gizorr byscop lét oc l&aolig;g leggja á þat, at stóll byscops þess <anchor id=a302.13>es á Íslande være, scyllde í Scála-hollte vesa; en áðr vas hverge. <anchor id=a302.14>Oc lagðe hann þar til stólsens Scála-holltz-land, oc margra cynja <anchor id=a302.15>auð&oeacute;fe &aolig;nnor, bæðe í l&aolig;ndom oc lausom aurom.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=10.5><anchor id=a302.16><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> En þá es hónom þótte sá staðr hafa vel at auð&oeacute;fom<note place=apparatus id=an302.7><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> -ævom, here.</note> þróasc, <anchor id=a302.17>þá gaf hann meirr an fiórðung byscops-dóms síns til þess at heldr <anchor id=a302.18>være ii byscops-stólar á lande her, an einn, svá sem Norðlendingar <anchor id=a302.19>æsto hann til.

<p n=10.6><anchor id=a302.20><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> En hann hafðe áðr láteð telja buendr á lande her; oc vóro<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a302.21>þá í Austfirðinga fiórðunge <hi rend=sc>VII</hi> hundroð heil: en í Rangæinga-fiórðunge <anchor id=a302.22><hi rend=sc>X</hi> (hundroð): en í Breið<hi>firð</hi>inga-fiórðunge <hi rend=sc>IX</hi>: en í <anchor id=a303.1><pb id=pb303 n=303>&OElig;yfirðinga fiórðunge <hi rend=sc>XII</hi>. En ótalðer vóro þeir es eige &aoacute;tto þing-farar-caupe <anchor id=a303.2>at gegna of allt Ísland.

<p n=10.7><anchor id=a303.3><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Ulfheðinn, Gunnars son ens Spaca, tóc l&aolig;g-s&aolig;go epter Márcus, <anchor id=a303.4>oc hafðe <hi rend=sc>IX</hi> sumor.

<p n=10.8><anchor id=a303.5><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þá hafðe Bergþórr, Hrafns son, <hi rend=sc>VI</hi> (sumor)<note place=apparatus id=an303.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hramfns, Cd. sumor]</ab> add. A&ast; (S).</note>.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=10.8.1><anchor id=a303.6><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi><ab type=parNum>8. b.</ab> En þá hafðe Goðmundr Þórgeirs son xii sumor.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an303.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> [8. b.] interpolated? for the following runs on Bergþor; A&ast; (SK) om.</note>

<p n=10.9><anchor id=a303.7><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Et fyrsta sumar es Bergþórr sagðe l&aolig;g upp, vas nýmæle þat <anchor id=a303.8>g&oelig;rt, at l&aolig;g or skyllde scrifa á bóc at Hafliða Móss sonar, of <anchor id=a303.9>vetrenn epter, at s&aolig;go oc umbráðe þeirra Bergþórs oc annarra <anchor id=a303.10>spacra manna, þeirra es til þess vóro tecner. Scylldo þeir g&oelig;rva<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a303.11>nýmæle þau &aolig;ll í l&aolig;gom, es þeim litesc þau betre an en forno l&aolig;g. <anchor id=a303.12>Scyllde þau segja upp et næsta sumar epter í L&aolig;grétto, oc þau <anchor id=a303.13>&aolig;ll halda<note place=apparatus id=an303.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>halda]</ab> haldaz, A&ast; (K).</note> es enn meire hlutr manna mælte þá eige gegn. En þat <anchor id=a303.14>varð at fram fara, at þá vas scrifaðr Víg-slóðe, oc mart annat í <anchor id=a303.15>l&aolig;gom, oc sagt upp í L&aolig;grétto af kenne-m&aolig;nnom of sumar-et<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a303.16>epter<note place=apparatus id=an303.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>oc sagt ... epter]</ab> oc leset upp um sumaret efter í Logretto, A&ast; (S).</note>. En þat lícaðe &aolig;llom vel, oc mælte því mange í gegn.

<p n=10.10><anchor id=a303.17><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Þat vas oc et fyrsta sumar es Bergþórr sagðe l&aolig;g upp: þá <anchor id=a303.18>vas Gizorr byscop óþingf&oeacute;rr af sótt; þá sende hann orð til Alþingis <anchor id=a303.19>vinom sínom oc h&aolig;fðingjom, at biðja scyllde Þórlac Rúnolfs son, <anchor id=a303.20>Þórleiks sonar, bróðor Hallz í Hauka-dale, at hann scyllde láta<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a303.21>vígjasc til byscops. En þat g&oelig;rðo aller svá sem orð hans qvómo <anchor id=a303.22>til. Oc fécsc þat af því, at Gizorr hafðe sialfr fyrr mioc beðet. <anchor id=a304.1><pb id=pb304 n=304>Oc fór hann útan þat sumar; en com út et næsta epter, oc vas þá <anchor id=a304.2>vígðr til byscops.

<p n=10.11><anchor id=a304.3><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Gizorr vas vígðr til byscops þá es hann vas fert&oelig;gr; þá vas <anchor id=a304.4>Gregorius <hi>septimus</hi> pape.  En síðan vas hann enn næsta vetr í <anchor id=a304.5>Danm&aolig;rco, oc com of sumaret epter hingat til lannz. En þá es<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a304.6>hann hafðe vereð xxiiij vetr byscop, svá sem faðer hans, þá vas <anchor id=a304.7>Ioan, Ogmundar son, vígðr til byscops fyrstr til stóls at Hólom. <anchor id=a304.8>Þá vas hann vetre miðr an half-sext&oelig;gr<note place=apparatus id=an304.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>half-sext&oelig;gr]</ab> emend., according to A&ast; (S), þá vas hann fiórom vetrom meirr an fimtogr; half-fertogr, Cd.</note>. En xii vetrom síðarr, þá <anchor id=a304.9>es Gizorr hafðe allz vereð byscop xxxvj vetra, þá vas Þórlácr vígðr <anchor id=a304.10>til byscops. Hann lét Gizorr vígja til stóls í Scála-holte at ser<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a304.11>lifanda. Þá vas Þórlácr ii vetrom miðr an xxx. En Gizorr <anchor id=a304.12>byscop andaðesc xxx nóttom<note place=apparatus id=an304.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>nóttom]</ab> thus, not genit., Cd.</note> síðarr í Scála-holte á enom þriðja <anchor id=a304.13>dege í vico [v]<note place=apparatus id=an304.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>v]</ab> add. A&ast; (K); om. Cd.</note> kalend. Junij.

<p n=10.12><anchor id=a304.14><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Á því áre eno sama <hi>obiit</hi>, Paschalis <hi>secundus</hi> pape fyrr an <anchor id=a304.15>Gizorr byscop; oc Baldvine Iorsala conungr; oc Arnaldus patriarcha<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a304.16>í Hierosalem<note place=apparatus id=an304.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Hierl&apos;m., Cd. </note>; oc Philippus Svia<note place=apparatus id=an304.5>Svia] Fracka k&apos;r, A&ast; (S).</note> conungr. En síðarr et <anchor id=a304.17>sama sumar, Alexius Grickja conungr, þá hafðe hann xxxviij vetr <anchor id=a304.18>seteð at stóle í Micla-garðe. En ii vetrom síðar varð Allda-mót. <anchor id=a304.19>Þá h&aolig;fðo þeir Eysteinn oc Sigurðr vereð xviij vetr <anchor id=a304.20>conungar í Norvege epter Magnús f&aolig;ðor sínn Óláfs son, Harallz<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a304.21>sonar. Þat vas cxx<note place=apparatus id=an304.6><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>cxx]</ab> hundrad ok attian, A&ast; (S).</note> vetrom epter fall Óláfs Tryggva sonar; en <anchor id=a304.22>ccl epter dráp Eadmundar Engla-conungs; [en tvau hundroð oc <anchor id=a305.1><pb id=pb305 n=305>fimm tiger, eðr nær því, efter es Ingolfr land-náms-maðr com til <anchor id=a305.2>Íslannz]<note place=apparatus id=an305.1><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en tvau ... Íslannz]</ab> add. A&ast; (S), homoiotel.; þá hafðe Ísland veret bygt cc vetra tolf röð, annat í heiðne en annat i Cristne, A&ast; (K).</note> en dxvj vetrom epter andlát Gregorius pava þess es <anchor id=a305.3>Cristne com á England: at því es taleð es. En hann andaðesc á <anchor id=a305.4>&aolig;ðro áre conungdóms Foco keisara, dciiij vetrom epter burð <anchor id=a305.5>Cristz at Almanna tale. Þat verðr allt saman mcxx &aoacute;r.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=11><anchor id=a305.6>Her lýcsc<note place=apparatus id=an305.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> lyxc, Cd.</note> siá bóc.

<p n=12><anchor id=a305.7>Þetta es cyn byscopa Íslendinga oc Ættar-tala.

<p n=13><anchor id=a305.8>Ketilbi&aolig;rn land-náms-maðr, sá es bygðe suðr at Mosfelle eno <anchor id=a305.9>&OElig;fra, vas faðer Teitz, f&aolig;ðor Gizorar ens Hvíta, f&aolig;ðor Ísleifs, es <anchor id=a305.10>fyrstr vas byscop í Scála-hollte, f&aolig;ðor Gizorar byscops.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=14><anchor id=a305.11>Hrollaugr land-náms-maðr, sa es bygðe austr á Síðo á Breiða-bólstað, <anchor id=a305.12>vas faðer Ozorar, f&aolig;ðor Þórdísar, móðor Hallz á Síðo, <anchor id=a305.13>f&aolig;ðor Egils, f&aolig;ðor Þórgerðar, móðor Ioans, es fyrstr vas byscop <anchor id=a305.14>at Hólom.

<p n=15><anchor id=a305.15>Oðr land-náms-kona, es bygðe vestr í Breiða-firðe í Hvamme,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a305.16>vas móðer Þórsteins ens Rauða, f&aolig;ðor Óleifs Feilans, f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a305.17>Þórðar Gellis, f&aolig;ðor Þórhilldar Riúpo, móðor Þórðar Hesth&aolig;fða, <anchor id=a305.18>f&aolig;ðor Carlsefnis, f&aolig;ðor Snorra, f&aolig;ðor Hallf<hi>r</hi>íðar, móðor Þórlács, <anchor id=a305.19>es nu es byscop í Scála-hollte næstr Gizore.

<p n=16><anchor id=a305.20>Helge enn Magre land-náma-maðr, sá es bygðe norðr í Eyja-firðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a305.21>í Crist-nese, vas faðer Helgo, móðor Einars, f&aolig;ðor Eyjolfs <anchor id=a306.1><pb id=pb306 n=306>Valgerðar sonar, f&aolig;ðor Goðmundar<note place=apparatus id=an306.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Goðmundar with a &dagger; above the line.</note>, f&aolig;ðor Eyjolfs, f&aolig;ðor Þórsteins, <anchor id=a306.2>f&aolig;ðor Ketils, es nú es byscop at Hólom næstr Ioanne.

<p n=17><anchor id=a306.3><hi rend=sc>Þesse</hi> ero n&aolig;fn langfeðga Ynglinga oc Breiðfirðinga:

<p n=18><anchor id=a306.4>I. Yngue Tyrkja-conungr. II. Ni&aolig;rðr Svia conungr. III. Fr&oelig;yr. <anchor id=a306.5>IIII. Fiolner, sá es dó at Frið-Fróða. V. Svegðer. VI. Vanlande.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a306.6>VII. Visburr. VIII. Dómalldr. IX. Dómarr. X. Dyggve. XI. <anchor id=a306.7>Dagr. XII. Alrecr. XIII. Agne. XIIII. Yngve. XV. Iorundr. <anchor id=a306.8>XVI. Aun enn Gamle. XVII. Egill Vendil-craca. XVIII. Óttarr. <anchor id=a306.9>XIX. Aðisl at Upps&aolig;lom. XX. Eysteinn. XXI. Yngvarr. XXII. <anchor id=a306.10>Braut-Qnundr. XXIII. Ingialldr enn Illráðe. XXIIII. Óláfr Tré&shy;telgja.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a306.11>XXV. Halfdan Hvítbeinn Upplendinga conungr. XXVI. <anchor id=a306.12>Goðr&oelig;ðr. XXVII. Óláfr. XXVIII. Helge. XXIX. Ingialldr, <anchor id=a306.13>dóttor-sonr Sigurðar Ragnars sonar Loðbrócar. XXX. Óleifr enn <anchor id=a306.14>Hvíte. XXXI. Þórsteinn enn Rauðe. XXXII. Óleifr F&ecedil;ilan es <anchor id=a306.15>fyrstr bygðe þeirra á Íslande. XXXIII. Þórðr Geller. XXXIIII.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a306.16>Eyiolfr, es scírðr vas í elle sínne þá es Cristne kom á Ísland. <anchor id=a306.17>XXXV. Þórkell. XXXVI. Geller, faðer þeirra Þórkels f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a306.18>Brannz, ok Þórgils, f&aolig;ðor<note place=apparatus id=an306.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Thus (f., i.e. foðor), Cd.</note> míns: en ec heiter <hi rend=sc>Are</hi>.



<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<!-- TRANSLATED TEXT OF LIBELLUS ISLANDORUM -->

<pb id=pb288a n=288>
<div3 id=en.islandorum lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>Here beginneth the little Book of the Icelanders.</head>

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Iceland was first settled out of Norway in the days of Harold Fair-hair, the son of Half-dan the Swarthy, in the time&mdash;according to the belief and count of Tait, my foster-father, the wisest man whom I knew, the son of bishop Is-laf, and of my father&apos;s brother Thor-kell, Gelle&apos;s son, who could remember far back, and of Thor-id, daughter of Snorre the priest, who was both wise in many things and a truthful narrator [of the history of the past]&mdash;when Ingw-here, son of Regin-here Lod-broc [Shag-breech], let slay Edmund the saint, the king of the English. And that was 870 winters after the birth of Christ, according to what is written in the history of him.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ing-wolf was the name of a Northern [Norwegian] man that truly is said to have journeyed first from there to Iceland, when Harold Fair-hair was sixteen winters old, and again a second time a few winters later. He settled south in Reek-wick, at a place called Ing-wolf&apos;s head, east from Min-thac&apos;s Eyre, where he first came to land, and it is called Ing-wolf&apos;s-fell, west of Olfos-water, where he took up his possession afterwards. At that time Iceland was grown with wood between fell and foreshore.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> There were then here Christian men, whom the Northmen call &lsquo;papa,&rsquo; but afterwards they went away because they would not be here with heathen men, and left behind them Irish books and bells and crooks, whereby it might be perceived that they were Irishmen.

<pb id=pb289a n=289><p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> And then there came about a very great journeying of men out hither from Norway, until Harold the king forbade it, because he thought it would end in leaving the land empty. Then they settled this, that every man who went thence hither and who was not dispensed therefrom, should pay the king five ounces.

<p>And it is said that Harold was king seventy winters, and was an eighty years old man. That was the beginning of paying what is now called land-ounce, <hi>or</hi> toll, and this was paid sometimes more, and sometimes less, until An-laf the Thick made it clear that every man should pay the king half a mark who should journey between Norway and Iceland, save women and such men as he excepted. So Thor-kell Gelle&apos;s son told us.


<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> ?rod-laug, son of Regin-wald, earl in More, took up his settlement in the east on Side, whence the <hi rend=sc>Men o&apos; Side</hi> are come.

<p>Cetil-beorn Cetil&apos;s son, a Norwegian man, took up his settlement in the south at the upper Moss-fell, whence the <hi rend=sc>Moss-fell-men</hi> are come.

<p>Aod, the daughter of Cetil Flat-neb, a Norwegian herse <hi>or</hi> lord, took up her settlement in the west in Broad-frith, whence the <hi rend=sc>Broad-frith-men</hi> are come.

<p>Helge the Lean, a Norwegian, the son of Ey-wind, the east-man, took up his settlement in the north in Ey-frith, whence are come the <hi rend=sc>Ey-frith-men</hi>.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And when Iceland was become widely settled, then did an eastern-man, who was called Wolf-leod <hi>or</hi> Ulf-liod, first bring out hither laws [i. e. Constitution] from Norway&mdash;so Tait told us&mdash;and they were called <hi rend=sc>Wolf-leod&apos;s laws</hi> [i.e. the Constitution of Ulf-liod]. He was the father of Gun-here, from whence the <hi rend=sc>Deep-dale-men</hi> are come in Ey-frith, <pb id=pb290a n=290>and the laws were mostly set according as Gula Moot&apos;s Laws were set at that time, or according to the counsels of Thor-laf the Wise, the son of Horda-Care, with regard to what should be added thereto or taken therefrom, or set in another way.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Wolf-leod was east in Lone, and it is told that Grim Goat-crop was his sworn-brother, the man who explored all Iceland, by the counsel of Wolf-leod, before the All-moot was held.

<p>And every man in the land here gave him a penny for it, and he gave the money afterwards to the temples [<hi>read</hi> the Temple of the All-moot].

<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> The All-moot was set by counsel of Wolf-leod and of all the men of the land where it now is, but before the Moot was at Keel-ness, which Thor-stan, son of Ing-wolf the Settler, the father of Thor-kell Moon, the Law-speaker, held there, and those chiefs that turned thereto.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But a man that owned the land at Blue-shaw had been made an outlaw for the murder of a thrall or freedman. His name is given as Thore Crop-beard, and his daughter&apos;s son is called Thor-wald Crop-beard, the man who afterwards journeyed into East-frith, and there burnt Gun-here, his own brother, in his house&mdash;so Hall Oreykia&apos;s son said. And he that was murdered was called Col, and the rift that has ever since been called Cols-geow, where his carcase was found, is called after him, and that piece of land afterwards became the Land of the Whole Congregation, and the men of the land set it apart for the maintenance of the All-moot, wherefore there is a common for wood for the All-moot in the Shaw, and on the heath pasture for the keeping of the horses. This Wolf-hedin <hi>or</hi> Ulf-hedin told us.

<pb id=pb291a n=291><p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Moreover, wise men have said that in sixty winters Iceland was all settled over, so that there was no more settlement made afterwards.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Next after this Raven, the son of Hæng the Settler, took the speakership next after Wolf-leod, and he held it twenty winters. He was out of Rang-water-thorp <hi>or</hi> wharf. That was sixty winters after the slaying of king Eadmund, a winter or two before Harold Fair-hair died, by the count of wise men.

<p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Thor-arin Rage&apos;s brother, son of Oleif the Shelty, took the speakership next after Raven, and held it other twenty winters. He was a Borg-frith-man.

<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>It</hi> was also then that the wisest men here in the land kept count in the two seasons four days of the fourth hundred [4 + 360], that makes two weeks of the sixth ten [52] and twelve months of thirty nights, and four days over. Then they marked by the course of the sun that the summer was moving backward to the spring. But no one could tell them that by one day there was more than a whole week&apos;s quotient in the two seasons, and that was the reason thereof.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But there was a man named Thor-stan the Black: he was a Broad-frither, the son of Hal-stan, son of Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie the Settler, and of Osc, daughter of Thor-stan the Red. He dreamed that he thought he was on the Rock of the Laws when there was a great gathering, and he was awake, but he thought that all other men were asleep. And afterwards he thought he was asleep, and he thought that all other men were awake. This dream Os-wif Helge&apos;s son, the mother&apos;s father of Gelle Thor-kell&apos;s son, read thus&mdash;that all men should be silent while <pb id=pb292a n=292>he was speaking at the Rock of the Laws, and after, when he was silent, that then all should shout in applause of what he had spoken. Now both of these were very wise men. And afterwards, when men came to the Moot, then he proposed this counsel at the Rock of the Laws that every seventh summer they should add a week, and try how that answered. But just as Os-wif read the dream all men wakened up to it fairly, and it was at once made law by the counsel of Thor-kell Moon and other wise men.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> By right count there are in every year five days of the fourth hundred [5 + 360] if it be not leap-year, but if it be then there is one day more, but according to our count there are four days, but since there is an addition according to our count every seventh year of a week, but other years of none, therefore every seven years together will be equally long by both counts. But if two leap-years fall between the years which have to be added to [the eke-years] then it is necessary to make the addition to the sixth year [not the seventh].

<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> A great Moot-suit came about between Thord Gelle, son of An-laf Feilan of Broad-frith, and Ord, who was called Ord o&apos; Tongue. He was a Borg-frither.  His son Thor-wald was at the burning of Thor-kell, Blund-Cetil&apos;s son, with Hen-Thore o&apos; Erne-wolf&apos;s-dale. But Thord Gelle was the chief in the suit, because Her-stan, son of Thor-kell, Blund-Cetil&apos;s son, had Thor-und his sister&apos;s daughter to wife. She was the daughter of Helge and Gun-here, and sister of Io-frith, whom Thor-stan, Egil&apos;s son, had to wife. And the suit was taken at the Moot <pb id=pb293a n=293>that was in Borg-frith, in the place that was afterwards called Thing-ness <hi>or</hi> Moot-ness. It was then law that suits for slaughter must be followed up at the moot that was nearest to the field of the dead [<foreign lang=la>locus actionis</foreign>], but they fell to battle, and the moot could not be carried on by law. There fell Thor-wolf Ref, brother of Alf a Dale, out of the company of Thord Gelle. And afterwards they took the cases to the All-moot, and there they fell to battle again. Then six men fell of Ord&apos;s company, and he (Hen-Thore) was outlawed and afterwards slain, and more of them that were at the burning.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Then Thord Gelle spoke at the Rock of Laws thereon&mdash;how ill it suited men to go to strange moots to sue for slaughter or any injury: and he spake of what things there were in his own way before he could bring the matter to law, and he said that others in their turns would have these troubles unless some better counsel were taken.

<p n=5.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Then the land was divided into Quarters, so that there were three moots in each Quarter, and moot-mates in each should all have their suits together, save that in the North-land-men&apos;s Quarter there were four moots, because they could not otherwise agree, for they that were north of Ey-frith would not seek to a moot there, nor they that were west to Skaw-frith; but yet there should be the same court-choosing <hi>or</hi> naming and the same law-court-ship [quota to the law-court] out of this quarter of theirs as out of any one of the others. And <pb id=pb294a n=294>afterwards there were established Quarter-moots, so Ulf-hedin, Gun-here&apos;s son, the Law-speaker, told us.

<p n=5.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Thor-kell Moon, son of Thor-stan Ing-wolf&apos;s son, took the Speakership of the Laws after Thor-arin, Rage&apos;s brother, and held it fifteen summers.

<p n=5.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Then Thor-gar o&apos; Light-water, the son of Thor-kell, held it seventeen summers.

<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> The land that is called <hi rend=sc>Greenland</hi> was found and settled from Iceland. Eiric the Red was the name of a Broad-frith-man that went out hence thither, and took in settlement there the land that is since called Eiric&apos;s-frith. He gave the land a name, and called it Greenland, and said that men would be ready to go thither if the land had a good name.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> They found there men&apos;s habitations both east and west in the land, both broken cayaks and stone-smithery, whereby it may be seen that the same kind of folk had been there as they which inhabit Wine-land, and whom the men of Greenland [Europeans] call Scraelings [the Eskimo].

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> But it was, when this land began to be settled, fourteen or fifteen winters before that Christendom came here to Iceland, according to what a man who himself went out with Eiric the Red told Thor-kell Gelleson in Greenland.

<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>An-laf</hi> [<hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Olaf</hi>] <hi rend=sc>Rex</hi>, the son of Tryggve, the son of An-laf, the son of Harold Fair-hair, brought Christendom into Norway and into Iceland. He sent hither to the land the priest that was called Thang-brand, and he here taught men Christendom, and baptized all them that <pb id=pb295a n=295>received the faith. But Hall o&apos; Side, the son of Thor-stan, let himself be baptized at the first, and Shelty Scegge&apos;s son of Thurs-water-dale, and Gizor the White, the son of Tait, the son of Cetil-beorn&apos;s son of Moss-fell, and many other chiefs. Nevertheless they were the more part that spake against and refused it. [<hi>Odd the Monk&apos;s copy reads</hi>: But Thang-brand came in his ship to Elfet&apos;s-frith, and was at Thwart-water through the winter.] And when he had been there one winter or two, then he went away, and he slew here two or three men who had libelled him. But he told king An-laf when he came east all that had passed over him here, and made it known that it was hopeless that Christendom should yet be received here. But the king grew very wroth at this, and was about to have those of our land murdered or slain who were then in the east. But that same summer Gizor and Shelty came out hence, and got the king to let them off, for they promised him their stewardship towards a new trial that Christendom might still be accepted here, and they told him that they had hoped nothing else but that it should be successful. And the next summer afterwards they went from the east, and the priest that was named Thor-mod, and came into the West-men&apos;s-Islands when ten weeks of the summer were past, and they had had a good passage. So Tait told that a man, who was himself there, said.

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> It was made law the next summer before this that men should come to the All-moot when ten weeks of the summer were gone, but hitherto men used to come the week before.

<pb id=pb296a n=296><p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> But they went at once to the mainland and then to the All-moot, and got Shelty to stay behind in Bath-dale with eleven men, because he had formerly been made a lesser outlaw the summer before at the All-moot for blasphemy, and this was done because he spake this ditty at the Rock of the Laws:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The god of graves I will blaspheme: Freyja a bitch I deem.
    <l>One of the twain must ever be: a bitch, Woden or his Ladye.
</lg>

<p n=7.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> But Gizor and they that were with him came to the place hard by Aul-fus-mere, that is called Welling-kettle, and thence sent word to the Moot that all the men of their party should come to meet them, because they had heard that their adversaries would try to keep them off the Moot-field by force of arms. But before that they set forth thence Shelty came riding to them with them that had stayed behind with him. [Shelty had brought out with him two great crosses, and one of them was the height of king An-laf, and Shelty took them with him to the Moot. <hi>So Odd the Monk reads.</hi>] And then they rode to the Moot, and their kinsmen and friends whom they had asked were there already to meet them. But the heathen men gathered together full armed, and it came mighty near to their fighting together till friends of both sides went between them [to part them].

<p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> But the next day after Gizor and Shelty went to the Rock of Laws, taking the crosses to the Rock of Laws, and there mooted their errand, and it said that it was passing strange how well they spoke.

<p>And thereby it came to pass that one man after another began to call <pb id=pb297a n=297>witness, and declare himself out of law with the others, the Christians and the heathen, and then they went away from the Rock of Laws.

<p n=7.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Then the Christian men asked Hall o&apos; Side to speak them a law which the Christians should follow; but he got clear of this by feeing Thor-gar the Law-speaker that he should speak them, though he was still a heathen. And then when men went to the booths, he (Thor-gar) lay down and spread his rug over him, and so lay all that day and the night after, and spake never a word. But the next morning he sat up and gave the word for men to go to the Rock of Laws.

<p n=7.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> And as soon as men were come there he began his speech, and said that he thought that the condition of the people would be a sorry plight, if men were not all to have one constitution here in the land. And he spake to men in many ways that they should never let this come about, saying that such disturbance must follow that assaults and batteries would be sure to follow between men, so that the land would be laid waste therefore. He showed forth how the kings of Norway and Denmark had carried on war and battles between them for a long time, till the men of those countries made peace between them, though they [the kings] wished it not; and this counsel turned out so [well] that within a little while the kings sent each other gifts and kept the peace as long as they lived. And now this seems to me the best counsel, that we do not let their will prevail who are most eager against each other, but let us so umpire the cases between the two sides that each side may win part of <pb id=pb298a n=298>his case, and let us all have one law and one faith. For this will be a true saying that if we break asunder the constitution we shall also break the peace. And he ended his speech so that each side agreed to this, that all should have one law, and that the one which he should declare law.

<p n=7.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Then it was made law that all men should be Christians, and they should take baptism that were yet unbaptized here in the land; but that as to the exposure of children the old laws should stand, and also as to the eating of horse-flesh. Men might sacrifice secretly if they wished, but they should be under the lesser outlawry if witnesses could be brought forward thereto. But a few winters later this heathendom was taken away like the rest. This which came to pass Tait told us, how that Christendom came to Iceland.

<p n=7.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> But An-laf Tryggvason fell the same summer, according to what Sæ-mund the priest says. There were then fighting against him, Swain Haraldsson, the king of the Danes, and An-laf the Swedish, son of Eiric of Upsal king of the Swedes, and Eiric Haconsson, that was afterwards earl in Norway. That was one hundred and thirty winters after the slaughter of Ead-mund, and one thousand after the birth of Christ, according to the general count [the church chronology].

<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> These are the names of the bishops that have been in Iceland, strangers, according to the saying of Tait. Frith-rec came here in the heathen days, but these were later: Bearn-hard the Book-wise, five years; Col, four years; Hroth-olf, nineteen years; Johan the Irish, four years; Bearn-hard, nineteen years; Heinrec, two years.

<pb id=pb299a n=299><p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And there came here other five that said they were bishops: Ern-wolf and Gothi-scolc, and three Armenians&mdash;Petrus and Abraham and Stephanus.

<p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Grim o&apos; Moss-fell, the son of Swerting, took the Law-speakership after Thor-gar, and held it two summers, and then he got leave that Scapte <hi>or</hi> Shafto, Thor-ord&apos;s son, his sister&apos;s son, should have it, because he was hoarse of speech himself.

<p n=8.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Shafto held the Law-speakership twenty-seven winters. He established the constitution of the Fifth Court; and also this, that no man should legally declare a slaughter as done by any one else than himself; but before these were here such law on this point as in Norway. In his days were many chiefs and mighty men outlawed or exiled for slaughter or assault by means of his might and rule of the law; but he died in the same year as An-laf the Stout fell, the son of Harold, the son of God-fred, the son of Beorn, the son of Harold Fair-hair, thirty winters later than An-laf Tryggvason fell.

<p n=8.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Then Stan Thor-gest&apos;s son took the Law-speakership, and held it three summers.

<p n=8.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Then Thor-kell Tyrve&apos;s son held it twenty summers.

<p n=8.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Then Gelle Bale-work&apos;s son held it nine summers.

<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Is-laf, the son of Gizor the White, was hallowed bishop in the days of Harold king of Norway, the son of Sig-rod, the son of Half-dan, the son of Sig-rod Wrise, the son of Harold Fair-hair. But when the chiefs and good-men saw that Is-laf was much more accomplished than <pb id=pb300a n=300>other clerks that could be got in this land, then many of them gave him their sons as his disciples, and had them hallowed as priests. Two of them were afterwards hallowed bishops&mdash;Col that was east in the Wick, and John at Holar.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Is-laf had three sons: they were all accomplished chiefs&mdash;Gizor the bishop, and Tait the priest, the father of Hall and Thor-wald. Tait was brought up by Hall in Hawk-dale, the man that was said by all to be the most generous and most worshipful in all good of all laymen here in this land. I also came to Hall, seven winters old, the winter after Gelle Thorkellson, my father&apos;s father and fosterer died, and I was then fourteen years.

<p n=9.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Gun-here the Wise had taken the Law-speakership when Gelle [Bale-work&apos;s son] gave it up, and held it three summers.

<p n=9.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Then Col-bain, Flose&apos;s son, held it six. The summer he took the Law-speakership Rex Harold fell in England.

<p n=9.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Then Gelle held it a second time three summers.

<p n=9.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Then Gun-here held it a second time one summer.

<p n=9.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Then Sig-hwat, Surt&apos;s son, Col-ban&apos;s sister&apos;s son, had it eight. In those days came Sæ-mund Sig-fusson hither to the land, from the south-east of Frankland, and had himself hallowed priest.

<p n=9.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Is-laf was hallowed bishop when he was fifty (Leo Nonus [MS. Septimus] was then pope); but he was the next winter in Norway, and afterwards came out hither, and he died at Scal-holt when he had been bishop four-and-seventy years. So Tait told us.

<pb id=pb301a n=301><p>It was on the Lord&apos;s-day, six nights after the feast of Peter and Paul [July 6], eighty winters after the fall of An-laf Tryggvason, I was there with Tait my foster-brother, twelve years old.

<p n=9.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> But Hall told us, who was both of good memory and truthful, that he could remember himself how he was baptized; that Thang-brand baptized him when he was three years old, and that was a winter before Christendom was made law here. But he set up house-keeping at the age of thirty, and dwelt sixty-four winters in Hawk-dale, and was ninety-four years old when he died. And that was on the feast of bishop Martin, the tenth winter after the death of bishop Is-laf.

<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> Bishop Gizor, Is-laf&apos;s son, was hallowed bishop at the prayer of the people of the country in the days of king An-laf, Harold&apos;s son, two winters, after Is-laf died. He was then one year here in the country, and the other in Gautland. But his true name was that he was called Gis-red, so he told us.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Marcus Skegge&apos;s son had the Law-speakership next after Sig-hwat, and he took it up the summer that bishop Gizor had been one winter here in the land, and carried it on four-and-twenty summers. According to his words are written the Lives of all the Law-speakers in this book, of them which were before our memory. But Thor-arin his brother told him, and Scegge their father, and other wise men, as to the lives of those who were before his memory, according as Biarne the Wise, their father&apos;s father, had told them, who remembered Thor-arin the Law-speaker and six others after him.

<pb id=pb302a n=302><p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Bishop Gizor was better beloved by all the people of the land than any other man whom we know to have been here on the land. For the love he was held in, and by reason of the speeches he and Sæ-mund made, and by the counsel of Marcus the Law-speaker it was made law that all men should count and value all their wealth, and swear what the true worth was, whether it were in land or chattels, and then give tithes thereof. That is a great token of how obedient the people of the country were to this man that he should be able to bring it about that all wealth should be valued under oath that was then in Iceland, and tithes given of it, and a law laid down that that should last as long as Iceland is inhabited.

<p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Gizor also had it laid down as law that the see of the bishop that was in Iceland should be in Scal-holt, for before it was nowhere; and he endowed the see of Scal-holt with land and many kind of riches besides, both in land and chattels.

<p n=10.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> And when he thought that this stead [see] was well thriven with wealth, then he gave away more than the fourth part of his bishopric, so that there might be rather two bishops&apos; sees in the land here than one, as the Northland men asked him to.

<p n=10.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> And ere this he had let tell [the numbers of] the franklins that were here in the land; and there were then in the East-frith-men&apos;s Quarter, seven hundred full [840]; and in the Rang-water-men&apos;s Quarter, ten [1200]; and in the Broad-frith-men&apos;s Quarter, nine [1080]; and <pb id=pb303a n=303>in Ey-frith-men&apos;s Quarter, twelve [1440]; but they were untold who had not to pay Moot-fare-gild in all Iceland.

<p n=10.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Wolf-Hedin, son of Gun-here the Wise, took the Law-speakership after Marcus, and held it nine summers.

<p n=10.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Then Berg-thor Raven&apos;s son six [summers].

<p n=10.8.1><hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>8. b. And then God-mund Thor-gar&apos;s son twelve summers.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi>

<p n=10.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> The first summer that Berg-thor spoke the law, this novella was made, that our law should be written in a book by Haf-lidi Marson the winter after, according to the speech and counsel of Berg-thor and other wise men who were chosen therefore. They were to make all the novellae in the land, which they should deem better than the old laws, and they were to be declared the next summer after in the Court of Laws, and keep all those which the greater part of men said nought against. And it came to pass that the Man-slaughter Section was then written by clerks, and many another thing in the laws, and declared in the Court of Laws the summer after, and it pleased all well, and no one spoke against it.

<p n=10.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> It was also the first summer that Berg-thor declared the law that bishop Gizor was not able to go to the Moot by reason of sickness. Then he sent word to the All-moot to his friends and the chiefs that they should ask Thor-lac, Run-wolf&apos;s son, the son of Thor-lac, the brother of Hall o&apos; Hawk-dale, that he should let himself be hallowed bishop, and all that his word came to did so, and it came about because Gizor himself <pb id=pb304a n=304>had asked it much before. And he [Thor-lac] went abroad that summer, and came out the next after and was then hallowed bishop.

<p n=10.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Gizor was hallowed bishop when he was forty; Gregorius Septimus was then pope; and then he was the next winter in Denmark, and came the summer afterwards hither to the land. And when he had been four-and-twenty winters bishop, as his father was, then John, Og-mund&apos;s son, was hallowed bishop, first to the see of Holar. He was there a winter less than half sixty [54]. But twelve winters after Gizor had been made bishop, in all six-and-thirty winters, then Thor-lac was hallowed bishop. Gizor had him hallowed to the see of Scal-holt in his own lifetime. Thor-lac was there two winters more than thirty. But bishop Gizor died thirty nights later in Scal-holt on the third day of the week [the fifth] of the kalends of June.

<p n=10.11><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> In the same year departed pope Paschalis the Second, earlier than bishop Gizor, and Baldwin king of Jerusalem, and Arnald patriarch in Jerusalem, and Philip king of the Swedes; and later the same summer Alexius king of the Greeks. He had then been thirty-eight winters established on the throne of Mickle-garth [Constantinople], and two winters later was the change of cycle [lunar cycle]. Ey-stan and Sig-urd had then been seventeen winters kings in Norway after their father Magnus, son of Olaf, the son of Harold. It was 120 winters after the fall of An-laf Tryggvason, and 250 after the slaughter of Ead-mund king of the <pb id=pb305a n=305>English, and 516 winters after the passing away of Gregorius the pope, that brought Christendom into England, according as it is counted, and he died in the second year of the kingdom of Phocas the kayser, 604 years after the birth of Christ by the general count. That maketh altogether 1120 years.

<p n=11><hi rend=sc>Here endeth this Book.</hi>


<p>[<hi>Epilogue of Dedication.</hi>]

<p n=12>This is the kindred of the bishops of the Icelanders and their genealogy.

<p n=13>Cetil-beorn, the settler that settled south at Moss-fell the Upper, was father of Tait, father of Gizor the White, father of <hi rend=sc>Is-laf</hi>, who was the first bishop in Scal-holt, the father of bishop <hi rend=sc>Gizor</hi>.

<p n=14>Hrol-laug, the settler that settled east in Side at Broad-bowster, was father of Ozur, father of Thor-dis, mother of Hall o&apos; Side, father of Egil, father of Thor-gerd, mother of <hi rend=sc>John</hi>, who was the first bishop of Holar.

<p n=15>And the settler that settled west in Broad-frith in Hwam was the mother of Thor-stan the Red, father of An-laf Feilan, father of Thord Gelle, father of Thor-hild Riupa, mother of Thord Horse-head, father of Carls-efne, father of Snorre, father of Hall-frith, mother of <hi rend=sc>Thor-lac</hi>, that is now bishop of Scal-holt next to Gizor.

<p n=16>Helge the Lean, the settler that settled north in Ey-frith in Christ-ness, was the father of Helga, mother of Einar, father of Ey-wolf <pb id=pb306a n=306>Walgerdsson, father of God-mund, father of Ey-wolf, father of Thor-stan, father of Ketil, that is now bishop of Holar next to John.


<p>[<hi>Author&apos;s Pedigree and Name.</hi>]

<p n=17>These are the names of the line of the fore-bears of the Ynglings and the Broad-frith-men:&mdash;

<p n=18>I. Yngwe, king of the Turks. II. Niord, king of the Swees [Swedes]. III. Frey. IV. Fiolne, he that died at Frith-Frode&apos;s. V. Swegde. VI. Wan-land. VII. Wis-bur. VIII. Dom-ald. IX. Dom-here. X. Dyggwe. XI. Day. XII. Alrec [Eal-ric]. XIII. Agne. XIV. Yngwe. XV. Ior-und [Eor-wend]. XVI. Aun the Old. XVII. Egil Wendil-crow. XVIII. Ott-ar [Oht-here]. XIX. Ath-isl [Ead-gils] at Upsal. XX. Ey-stan. XXI. Yng-war [Yngw-here]. XXII. Braut-Onund [Ean-wend the Roadmaker]. XXIII. Ingi-ald the Ill-rede. XXIV. An-laf Tree-feller. XXV. Half-dan White-leg, king of Up-land-men. XXVI. God-rod [Godo-frith]. XXVII. An-laf. XXVIII. Helge. XXIX. Ingi-ald, daughter&apos;s son of Sig-rod, son of Ragnar Lod-broc. XXX. Oleif the White. XXXI. Thor-stan the Red. XXXII. Oleif Feilan, who first of them settled in Iceland. XXXIII. Thord Gelle. XXXIV. Ey-wolf, who was baptized in his old age when Christendom came to Iceland. XXXV. Thor-kell. XXXVI. Gelle, father of these: Thor-kell, father of Brand, and of Thor-gils my father: but my name is <hi rend=sc>Are</hi>.


</div3>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<pb id=pb307 n=307>
<div1 id=s2.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 2.</ab> PRIMITIVE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE DAYS OF THE SETTLEMENT.</head>


<p>Scattered up and down the Icelandic Family Histories and the Kings&apos; Lives are a number of curious and precious statements relating to primitive law and custom. These are evidently not integral parts of the documents in which they occur, but pieces taken from some other work and inserted by the scribes or editors as notes or glosses explanatory of some point or passage of the text in hand. They bear nearly all one stamp, are couched in a peculiar and consistent phraseology, and compare in all points with the similar notices by Are in his Landnama-book and Libellus. It is but reasonable to ascribe them to Are; and, indeed, it is not likely that there were in Iceland two persons of like interest in the past and gifts to record the knowledge they gleaned, both alike using the same peculiar technical terms. But though we are safe in supposing these morsels to be fragments of some work of Are, what work was it? Were it not that Liber was dedicated to two bishops, and, being presumably written in Latin, would afford no good place for such matter, we might ascribe them to this last work. Taking all things into consideration, we may more securely suppose that in some work possibly treating of Icelandic Legal Antiquities, Are had gathered many of those valuable remains of Teutonic heathendom in Norway, the Western Isles, and Iceland itself. His interest in the origin of the Icelandic polity, his legal knowledge and precision of statement, and the fact that the subject was one that was so consonant to his talents, would easily persuade us that a work of this kind&mdash;a mere &lsquo;scroll&rsquo; of a few sheets maybe&mdash;may have once existed. However this be, it will not be seriously questioned that internal evidence, as well as external, points to Are and his age as the fountain-head of all our knowledge of old Northern law and custom, and in ascribing to him the authorship of the mass of matter contained in this section, we rest on ground that will not be easily shaken.

<p>We have separated those notices of early Norwegian laws and traditional customs which go back to and refer to times older than the Wicking-tide (9th and 10th centuries), as they properly belong to older Scandinavian history, but kept all those which have any connection with men or matters of the days of the migration to and colonization of the British Isles and Iceland.

<p>They are for convenience of reference roughly classed under a few heads as follows:&mdash;


<list>
    <item><ab type=itemNum>I.</ab> Temple Law and Ritual.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>II.</ab> Oaths of Procedure.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>III.</ab> Legal Ceremonials.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>IV.</ab> Holm-gang, <hi>or</hi> Wager of Battle.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>V.</ab> Criminal Law.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>VI.</ab> Family Law.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>VII.</ab> Wicking Law.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>VIII.</ab> Merchant Law.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>IX.</ab> Constitutional History.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>X.</ab> Early Christian Custom.
</list>


<pb id=pb308 n=308><p>The source from which each is taken is duly referred to at the foot of each extract.

<p>The majority of these glosses come from the minor Sagas; as in the later and greater Sagas such matter has been thoroughly and artistically worked into the mass of narrative or dialogue, so that even where it seems to show, it cannot be now severed from the context. Of course the few fragments now remaining and here printed, are but the mere specimens of a mass of custom and law now entirely lost and forgotten, but they suffice to show its primitive type. They are also the more valuable, inasmuch as they are not affected by subsequent legal tradition, which must always be reckoned with, when lawyers deal with archaic law. Hence we have given another section to the bits of early law preserved in Grágas, etc.

<p>The translation is as close as may be, the importance of preserving the exact wording being great. There are a few notes subjoined on points of interest, but we have not attempted here to deal with the vast variety of anthropologic and legal questions which these little &lsquo;anecdota&rsquo; raise. English historians and archaeologists will find them worthy of study.

<p>The pieces from the Kings&apos; Lives are taken from Kringla; as for those of Grágas, Cd. is = Cd. Reg., S = Cod. Stad. The Trygða-mál (II) is the longest and best specimen of alliterative &lsquo;carmina,&rsquo; as it were, that have come to us. Even in the Eddic songs we find traces of such, viz. the curse in the Helgi Lay, l. 261 ff., is partly and imperfectly made up of such a carmen, alliterative but not regular Epic verse. These Trygða-mál have come to us in partial variation in Greg. Cod. Reg., in Heiðar-viga Saga, ed. Holm. (H), and lastly, an inferior text in Grette Saga (G). A few lines have been picked out from these latter marked in brackets.

<p>The famed Law fragments inserted into Hawk&apos;s-book, IV. 13, and here entered, are in fact three different bits of ancient law. The first bit (III) can have no relation to Iceland,&mdash;ships of war never crossed the ocean,&mdash;but holds good for the Scandinavian continent. The Ring-oath section we have placed in I; and lastly, the list on the division into Quarters in IX.

<p>We have omitted all pieces contained (and already printed) in Landnama-book and in Libellus.

<p>The Temple-section in Eyrbyggja is supplemented by the (though inferior) text in Kialnesinga Saga of Watzhyrna; both editors (of Eyrb. and of Kialnesinga) must have drawn from the same original.

<p>We have in a few instances restored in brackets the lost heathen formula.

<p>A few sections of doubtful authority from Gunnlaug Saga and Grette Saga we have given in brackets.



<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb309 n=309>
<div2 id=ch2.1.1 lang=is n=I rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.1)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>I.</ab> <hi>Temple Law and Ritual.</hi></head>

<p n=1.0><anchor id=a309.1>Freyr reiste at Upps&aolig;lom hof miket, oc sette þar h&aolig;foð-stað <anchor id=a309.2>sínn; lagðe þar til allar scylder sínar, l&aolig;nd oc lausan <anchor id=a309.3>eyre&mdash;þá hófsc Uppsala-auðr, oc hefer haldesc æ síðan.&mdash;<hi>Yngl. <anchor id=a309.4>Saga</hi>, ch. 12.

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a309.5><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Þat vas forn siðr, þá es blót scylde vesa, at aller b&oeacute;ndr scyldo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a309.6>þar coma sem hof vas, oc flytja þannog f&aolig;ng sín þau es þeir scyldo <anchor id=a309.7>hafa meðan veizlan stóð. At veizlo þeirre scyldo aller menn &aolig;l <anchor id=a309.8>eiga; þar vas oc drepenn allz-conar smale oc svá hross.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a309.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En blóð þat allt es þar com af, þá vas callat hlaut-blóð<note place=apparatus id=an309.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hlaut-blóð]</ab> emend.; hlaut, Cd.</note>, oc <anchor id=a309.10>hlaut-bollar þat es blóð þat stóð í, oc hlaut-teinar. Þat vas svá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a309.11>g&oelig;rt sem st&oelig;clar: með því (blóðe) scylde rióða stallana &aolig;llo <anchor id=a309.12>saman, oc svá vegge hofsens útan oc innan; oc svá st&oelig;ccva á <anchor id=a309.13>mennena; en sláttr scylde sióða til mann-fagnaðar.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a309.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Eldar scyldo vesa á miðjo golfe í hofeno, oc þar catlar yfer, <anchor id=a309.15>oc scylde full um eld bera.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a309.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En sá es g&oelig;rðe veizlona, oc h&aolig;fðinge vas, þá scylde hann <anchor id=a309.17>signa fullet oc allan blót-matenn.

<p n=1.5><anchor id=a309.18><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Scylde fyrst <hi>Oðens-full</hi>, scylde þat drecca til sigrs oc ríkes <anchor id=a309.19>conunge sínom: en síðan <hi>Niarðar-full</hi>, oc <hi>Freys-full</hi>, tils árs oc <anchor id=a309.20>friðar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=1.6><anchor id=a309.21><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þá vas m&aolig;rgom m&aolig;nnom títt at drecca þar næst <hi>Braga-full</hi>.

<pb id=pb310 n=310><p n=1.7><anchor id=a310.1><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Menn drucco oc full frænda sínna, þeirra es heygðer<note place=apparatus id=an310.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>heygðer]</ab> thus Kringla.</note> h&aolig;fðo <anchor id=a310.2>veret: oc vóro þat minne c&aolig;lloð.&mdash;<hi lang=en-UK>Kings&apos; Lives, Haconar Saga.</hi>

<p n=2.0><anchor id=a310.3>Þann g&aolig;lt es mestan fecc, scylde hann (conungr) gefa Frey: <anchor id=a310.4>c&aolig;lloðo þeir hann svá helgan, at yfer hans burst scylde sverja um <anchor id=a310.5>&aolig;ll stór-m&aoacute;l, oc scylde þeim gelte blóta at sónar-blóte Ióla-aftan:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a310.6>scylde leiða sónar-g&aolig;ltenn í h&aolig;ll fyrer conong, l&aolig;gðo menn þá <anchor id=a310.7>hendr yfer burst hans, oc strengja heit.&mdash;<hi>Heidrec&apos;s Saga.</hi>

<p n=2.1><anchor id=a310.8><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Vóro dyrr á hlið-veggenom<note place=apparatus id=an310.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> báðom hliðveggjom, B.</note> oc nær &aolig;ðrom endanom: þar <anchor id=a310.9>fyr innan stóðo &aolig;ndoges-súlornar, oc vóro þar í naglar, þeir héto <anchor id=a310.10>regin-naglar.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a310.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þar fyr innan vas frið-staðr mikell.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a310.12><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Innar af hofeno vas hús í þá líking sem nú es s&aolig;ng-hús í <anchor id=a310.13>kirkjom; oc stóð þar stalle á miðjo golfeno sem altare; oc lá þar <anchor id=a310.14>á hringr einn mót-lauss, tví-eyringr; oc scylde þar at sverja eiða <anchor id=a310.15>alla. Þann hring scylde hof-goðe hafa á hende ser til allra mann-funda.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=2.4><anchor id=a310.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Á stallanom scylde oc standa hlaut-bolle; oc þar í hlaut-teinn<note place=apparatus id=an310.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Read, hlaut-teinar?</note> <anchor id=a310.17>sem stoccull være oc scylde þar st&oelig;ccva með or bollanom <anchor id=a310.18>blóðe því es hlaut-blóð<note place=apparatus id=an310.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hlaut-blóð]</ab> emend.; hlaut, Cd.</note> vas callat: þat vas þess-conar blóð es <anchor id=a310.20>s&oeacute;fð vóro þau kyckvende es goðonom vas fórnat.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=2.5><anchor id=a310.21><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> [Um-hverfis stallann vas goðonom skipat í af-húseno.]<note place=apparatus id=an310.5><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Spurious.</note>

<pb id=pb311 n=311><p n=2.6><anchor id=a311.1><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Til hofsens scyldo aller menn tolla gialda, oc vesa scylder <anchor id=a311.2>hof-goða til allra ferða, sem nú ero þing-menn h&aolig;fðingjom.

<p n=2.7><anchor id=a311.3><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> En Goðe scylde hofe upp halda af sialfs síns costnaðe, svá at <anchor id=a311.4>eige hr&oelig;rnaðe; oc hafa inne blót-veizlor.

<p n=2.8><anchor id=a311.5><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En m&aolig;nnom es þeir blótoðo (r. bléto) scylde steypa ofan í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a311.6>fen pat es úte vas hiá duronom. Þat c&aolig;lloðo þeir Blót-keldo.

<p n=2.9><anchor id=a311.7><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Þar á [<hi>on the stall</hi>] scylde vesa eldr sá es aldrege scylde <anchor id=a311.8>sloccna.&mdash;<hi>Nos. 1&ndash;7 from Eyrb. Saga</hi>; <hi>8&ndash;9 from Kialn. Saga</hi>.

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a311.9><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Baugr tví-eyringr eða meire scylde liggja í hverjo h&aolig;foð-hofe <anchor id=a311.10>á stalla: þann baug scylde hverr Goðe hafa á hende ser til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a311.11>l&aolig;g-þinga allra þeirra es hann scylde sialfr heyja; oc rióða hann <anchor id=a311.12>þar áðr í roðro blót-nautz<note place=apparatus id=an311.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> rioðru nautz bloðs, Cd.</note> þess es hann blótaðe þar sialfr.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a311.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hverr sá maðr, es þar þurfte l&aolig;g-scil af hende at leysa at <anchor id=a311.14>dóme, scylde áðr eið vinna at þeim bauge, oc nefna ser vátta tvá <anchor id=a311.15>eða fleire. &lsquo;Nefne-ec [N. N. and M. M.] í þat vætte&rsquo; scylde hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a311.16>segja, &lsquo;at ec vinn eið at bauge, l&aolig;g-eið. Hialpe mer svá Freyr <anchor id=a311.17>oc Ni&aolig;rðr, oc enn Almáttce Óss<note place=apparatus id=an311.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> r. e. Óss, Cd.</note>, sem ec mon svá s&aolig;c þessa s&oeacute;kja,&mdash;eða <anchor id=a311.18>verja, eða vætte<note place=apparatus id=an311.3><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vætte]</ab> vitni, Cd.</note>, eða cviðo; eða dóma<note place=apparatus id=an311.4><ab type=textRef>d&oeacute;ma]</ab> om. Cd.</note> d&oeacute;ma,&mdash;sem ec veit <anchor id=a311.19>réttazt, oc sannazt, oc h&oelig;lzt at l&aolig;gom; oc &aolig;ll l&aolig;g-mælt<note place=apparatus id=an311.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> logmæt, Cd.</note> scil af <anchor id=a311.20>hende leysa þau es under mec coma, meðan ec em á þesso þinge.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Hawk&apos;s-bóc.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a311.21>Landn.</hi> IV. 13, p. 187.

<pb id=pb312 n=312><p n=3.3><anchor id=a312.1>Sá maðr es hofs-eið scylde vinna, tóc silfr-baug í h&aolig;nd ser, <anchor id=a312.2>þann es roðenn vas í nautz blóðe, þess es til blóta være haft, oc <anchor id=a312.3>scylde eige minna standa an þriá aura. Þá kvað Glúmr svá at <anchor id=a312.4>orðe, etc.&mdash;See below, <hi>Glúma</hi>.


<p lang=en-UK><hi>The Oath.</hi>

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a312.5>Vas á cveðit nær eiðrenn scylde unnenn vesa um haustet at<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a312.6>fimm vicom ... eða hann vinne eiða í þremr hofom í Eyja-firðe, <anchor id=a312.7>oc eið-fall ef þá k&oelig;mr eige framm.

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a312.8>(Þá kvað Glúmr svá at orðe): &lsquo;Ec nefne Asgrím í vætte, annan <anchor id=a312.9>Gizor í þat vætte, at ec vinn hofs-eið at bauge, oc sege-ec þat <anchor id=a312.10>Æse, at ec vasc-at þar, oc ec vác-at þar, oc rauðc-at þar odd oc<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a312.11>egg, es Þórvaldr Crókr feck bana.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Glúma</hi>, ch. 25.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=en.ch2.1.1 n=I lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>I.</head>

<p n=1.0><hi>Temple Treasury.</hi> Frey raised a great temple at Upsala [Up-halls] and set there his head-stead <hi>or</hi> capital, and endowed it with all his revenues <hi>or</hi> dues, land and moveables. That was the beginning of the Treasury of Upsala, which hath continued ever since.

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> It was the old way, when a sacrifice was to be, that all the franklins should come to the place where the temple was, and carry thither the victuals that they wished to have as long as the banquet <hi>or</hi> feast lasted. All were to have a drinking together, and there were also slaughtered all kind of cattle and also horses.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And all the blood that came thereof was then called <hi>sortilege-blood</hi>, and <hi>sortilege-bowls</hi> those wherein the blood stood, and <hi>sortilege-twigs</hi> that were made like a sprinkler. With this [blood] were all the altars to be sprinkled withal, and also the walls of the temple without and within, and also sprinkled on the people, but the meat was seethed for the entertainment of the people.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> There had to be fires in the midst of the floor of the temple, and kettles over them, and the toasts were carried across the fire.

<p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> And he that made the feast or was chief had to make a sign or sain over the toast and the sacrificial meat.

<p n=1.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> First must come <hi>Wodin&apos;s toast</hi>: that was drunk to victory and power of the king; and then <hi>Niard&apos;s or Nerth&apos;s toast</hi>; and <hi>Frey&apos;s toast</hi> for good seasons and peace.

<p n=1.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> It was many man&apos;s wont to drink <hi>Brage&apos;s toast</hi> after that.

<pb id=pb310a n=310><p n=1.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Men also would drink a toast to their kinsmen that had been laid in their barrows, and that was called the <hi>memory-toast</hi>.

<p n=2.0><hi>Vows on the sacrificial boar.</hi> The biggest boar they could get the king would give to Frey, and they called him so holy that over his bristles they would swear in all their great cases, and they would sacrifice this boar at the <hi>Sona-sacrifice</hi>, on the even of Yule. They would lead the Sona-boar into the hall before the king, and laying their hands over his bristles they made their vows.&mdash;<hi>Heidrec&apos;s Saga.</hi>

<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> There were doors in the side walls nearer the one end, and inside over against these stood the porch-pillars, and there were nails in them. They were called <hi>the nails of the powers</hi> [holy nails].

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And within it was a great sanctuary.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> At the upper end, jutting out from the temple, was a house in the fashion of the choir in the churches now, and there stood a stall [table] in the middle of the floor, like an altar, and thereon lay a ring without a join, of two-ounce weight, upon which all oaths had to be sworn. This ring the temple-gode <hi>or</hi> priest had to have on his hand at all assemblies.

<p n=2.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> On the stall moreover the <hi>sortilege or lot-bowl</hi> used to stand, and in it the <hi>sortilege or lot-twigs</hi>, as it were a sprinkler, to sprinkle withal the blood out of the bowl which was called <hi>lot</hi>-[<hi>blood</hi>]. It was the blood of the living things that were pithed which were offered to the gods.

<p n=2.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> [Around the table the gods were set up in the off-house [annex].]

<pb id=pb311a n=311><p n=2.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> All men used to pay toll to the temple, and were bound to all summons of the temple-gode, as thing-men are now to their chiefs.

<p n=2.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> But the gode <hi>or</hi> priest was bound to keep up the temple at his own cost, so that it did not fall into ruin, and give the sacrificial feasts inside it.

<p n=2.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> But the men whom they would sacrifice were cast down into a pool that was outside hard by the doors. They called it the Well of Sacrifice.

<p n=2.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Thereupon [on the altar] there had to be a fire that was never to be quenched.&mdash;<hi>Nos. 1&ndash;7 from Eyrb.</hi>; <hi>8&ndash;9 from Kialn. Saga, Watzhyrna</hi>.

<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> A Ring of two-ounce weight or more must lie on the altar in every head-temple. This ring every gode <hi>or</hi> priest must carry in his hand to any law-moot that he himself was to preside over, and he must first redden it in the blood of the sacrificial beast which he sacrificed there himself.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Every man that needed to perform any law-business at the court, must first take an oath on that ring, and name two witnesses or more&mdash;

<p>&lsquo;I name N. N. and M. M. witnesses herein [he must say], that I take an oath on the ring, a lawful oath. So help me Frey and Nerth, and the Almighty Anse [Thunder], as I do, <hi>according as the case may be</hi>, pursue this suit, <hi>or</hi> defend [this suit], <hi>or</hi> bear witness, <hi>or</hi> give verdict, <hi>or</hi> doom a doom [sentence], as I know it to be most righteous and most true and most according to law, and perform all lawful acts that come <hi>or</hi> fall upon me while I am on this moot.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Landn.</hi>

<pb id=pb312a n=312><p n=3.3>The man that would take a temple-oath took a silver ring in his hand that was reddened with the beasts&apos; blood that were made a sacrifice, and which was not of less weight than three ounces.&mdash;<hi>Gluma.</hi>

<p n=3.4><hi>Temple-oath.</hi> The time was fixed when the oath should be taken in the harvest at the five weeks [i.e. when five weeks of the summer were left, c. Sept. 10] ..., and he must take the oath at three temples in Ey-frith, and the oath was to be null, <hi>or</hi> there should be oath-fall if it were not performed then.&mdash;<hi>Gluma.</hi>

<p n=3.5><hi>Clearing-oath.</hi> Then Glum spake in these words: &lsquo;I name As-grim to witness, and the second Gizor to witness this; and I take a temple-oath on the ring, and I say this to the Anse, that I was not there, and I did not fight there, and I did not redden point or edge there when Thor-wald Croke gat his death <hi>or</hi> bane.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Gluma.</hi>


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=II id=ch2.1.2 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.2)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>II.</ab> <hi>Oaths of Procedure.</hi></head>

<p n=0.1><anchor id=a312.12>Þá es manne frelse gefet at fullo es hann es í l&aolig;g leiddr. Hann <anchor id=a312.13>scal í l&aolig;g leiða Goðe sá es hann es í þinge með. Hann scal taca <anchor id=a312.14>cross [baug] í h&aolig;nd ser, oc nemna vátta:

<p n=0.2><anchor id=a312.15>&lsquo;Í þat vætte, at ec vinn<note place=apparatus id=an312.1><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> hann vinnr, Cd.</note> eið at crosse, [at bauge] l&aolig;g-eið, oc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a312.16>sege-ec þat Goðe [Æse] at hann mon halda l&aolig;gom sem sá es vel <anchor id=a312.17>heldr, oc hann vill þá vesa í l&aolig;gom með &aolig;ðrom m&aolig;nnom: þeim<note place=apparatus id=an312.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> Thus Cd.</note> <anchor id=a312.18>sé Goð gramt [goð gr&aolig;m] es því níter, nema fé síno boéte.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Grág. <anchor id=a312.19>Cod. Reg.</hi>

<p n=0.3><anchor id=a312.20>Fimtar-dóms-eiðr: Hann scal taca bóc í h&aolig;nd ser, meire an<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a312.21>hals-bóc, oc nemna ser vátta [N. N. and M. M.] &lsquo;í þat vætte, at <anchor id=a313.1><pb id=pb313 n=313>ec vinn eið at bóc, Fimtar-dóms-eið: Hialpe mer svá Goð í þvísa <anchor id=a313.2>lióse oc &aolig;ðro,&rsquo; scal hann qveða; &lsquo;sem ec man svá s&oelig;kja s&aolig;c <anchor id=a313.3>mína á hendr hónom (oc nefna hann) sem ec hygg sannaz oc <anchor id=a313.4>rettaz oc hellz at l&aolig;gom; oc ec hygg hann sannan [ó-sannan] at <anchor id=a313.5>s&aolig;c þeirre es ec hefe á hende hónom: oc ec hefca fé boðet í dóm<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a313.6>þenna til liðs mer um s&aolig;c þessa: oc ec monca bióða: hefca-ec <anchor id=a313.7>fundet, oc monca-ec finna hvárke til laga né til ólaga.&rsquo;

<p n=0.4><anchor id=a313.8>Sannaðar-menn ... þeir scolo taca bóc í h&aolig;nd ser meire an hals-bóc, <anchor id=a313.9>oc nefna ser vátta: &lsquo;í þat vætte, at ec vinn eið at bóc, Fimtar-dóms-eið: <anchor id=a313.10>Hialpe svá mer Goð (scal hann queða) í þvísa lióse oc<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a313.11>&aolig;ðro, sem ec hygg þat, at N. N. myne svá s&oeacute;kja s&aolig;c sína á hendr <anchor id=a313.12>M. M. sem hann hyggr sannaz oc rettaz oc hellz at l&aolig;gom: oc <anchor id=a313.13>hann hyggr hann sannan [ó-sannan] at s&aolig;c þeirre (oc queða á <anchor id=a313.14>s&aolig;cena es hann hefer á hende hónom): oc hefer-at hann fé boðet <anchor id=a313.15>í dóm þenna til liðs ser um s&aolig;c þessa: oc mon-at hann bióða: oc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a313.16>hefer-at hann fundet, oc mon-at hann finna, hvárke til laga né <anchor id=a313.17>ólaga.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Grág. Þing sk. þ.</hi>

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a313.18><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> &lsquo;Aller vito at-burðe um mis-sætte þeirra N. N. oc M. M.; <anchor id=a313.19>en nu ero viner þeirra við comner, oc vilja þá sætta.&rsquo;

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a313.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> &lsquo;Nú selr N. N., M. M. grið til sáttar-stefno þeirrar, es þeir<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a313.21>hafa á cveðet, firer sec oc sínn erfingja, oc alla þá menn es hann á <anchor id=a313.22>griðom fyrer at halda<note place=apparatus id=an313.1><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>halda]</ab> S; selja, R.</note>: en M. M. tecr grið af M. M. ser til handa <anchor id=a313.23>oc sínom erfingjom, oc &aolig;llom þeim m&aolig;nnom es hann þarf grið til <anchor id=a313.24>handa at taca.&rsquo;

<pb id=pb314 n=314><p n=1.3><anchor id=a314.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> &lsquo;En nú es Goð sialfr þeirra fyrstr, es baztr es, oc aller Helger <anchor id=a314.2>menn, oc allr Heilagr dómr; Páve at Róme, oc Patriarche, conongr <anchor id=a314.3>várr oc byscopar órer, oc bóc-lærðer menn aller; oc allt cristet <anchor id=a314.4>folc.&rsquo;

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a314.5><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> &lsquo;Ec nefne tolf menn í grið þesse á miðlom þeirra N. N. oc<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a314.6>M. M. es nú standa tveim-megin at m&aoacute;lom&rsquo;&mdash;(oc scal nefna þá <anchor id=a314.7>tolf menn).

<p n=1.5><anchor id=a314.8><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Síðan scal sá maðr, es fyrer griðom mæler, nefna vátta, tvá <anchor id=a314.9>eða fleire, &lsquo;at því vætte, at þesse grið, es nú ero nefnd, scolo vesa <anchor id=a314.10>full oc f&aolig;st, allra manna á miðle þeirra es her coma í mann-s&aolig;mnoð<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a314.11>þenna, oc meðan menn ero her lengst á mann-funde <anchor id=a314.12>þessom; oc hverr maðr c&oelig;mr heim til síns heima. Oc þótt oftarr <anchor id=a314.13>verðe funder lagðer til mála þeirra, þá scolo þó grið halda<note place=apparatus id=an314.1><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> haldasc?</note>, til þess <anchor id=a314.14>es svá es m&aoacute;lom þeirra locet, sem þau mego bazt lúcasc.&rsquo;

<p n=1.6><anchor id=a314.15><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> &lsquo;Nú heldr i&aolig;rð griðom upp: en himinn varðar fyr ofan: en<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a314.16>haf et Rauða fyr útan, es liggr um l&aolig;nd &aolig;ll þau es ver h&aolig;fom <anchor id=a314.17>tíðende af. En á miðle þessa ende-marca, es nú hefe-ec her talt <anchor id=a314.18>fyrer m&aolig;nnom, þrífesc sá maðr hverge es þesse grið rýfr, es ec <anchor id=a314.19>hefe her nefnd; oc binde hann ser svá h&aolig;fga byrð<hi>e</hi> at hann <anchor id=a314.20>comesc aldrege undan, en þat es&mdash;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a314.21>Goð-Dróttens [goða] greme oc grið-bítz namn.
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a314.22>En þeir menn aller hafe Goðs misc-unn [goða hylle], oc griðom <anchor id=a315.1><pb id=pb315 n=315>halda vel, oc allra heilagra árnaðar-orð til allrar þurftar sínnar við <anchor id=a315.2>Almátcan Goð!

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a315.3>Sé Goð hollr [goð holl] þeim&apos;s heldr griðom,
    <l><anchor id=a315.4>en gramr [gr&aolig;m] þeim&apos;s grið rýfr:
    <l><anchor id=a315.5>hollr [holl] þeim&apos;s heldr.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a315.6>Hafet heiler grið selsc!&rsquo;
</lg>

<p n=1.7><anchor id=a315.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þat ero forn l&aolig;g á lande óro, ef maðr verðr secr um griða-rof, <anchor id=a315.8>at þeir menn tolf es í grið ero nefnder, eigo at taca rétt or fé <anchor id=a315.9>hans, átta aura ens fimta-tegar.

<p n=1.8><anchor id=a315.10><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En þat ero l&aolig;g í Norege oc (á) alla Dansca Tungo, ef maðr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a315.11>þyrmer eige griðom, at sá maðr es út-lagr fyr ende-langan Noreg <anchor id=a315.12>framm, oc ferr bæðe l&aolig;ndom sínom oc lausa-fé; oc scal aldregi í <anchor id=a315.13>land coma síðan.&mdash;<hi>Griða-mál</hi> (Grág. Cod. Reg.).


<p n=2.1><anchor id=a315.14><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Sacar vóro á mille þeirra N. N. oc M. M.: en nú ero þær <anchor id=a315.15>settar oc fé b&oeacute;ttar:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a315.16>Sem metendr m&aoacute;to;
    <l><anchor id=a315.17>oc teljendr t&aolig;lðo:
    <l><anchor id=a315.18>oc dómr d&oeacute;mðe:
    <l><anchor id=a315.19>oc þiggjendr þ&aoacute;go oc þaðan b&aoacute;ro
    <l><anchor id=a315.20>með fé fullo oc framm comnom eyre,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a315.21>þeim í h&aolig;nd selt es hafa scyllde.
</lg>

<pb id=pb316 n=316><p n=2.2><anchor id=a316.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> It scolot vesa menn:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a316.2>Sátter oc sam-værer
    <l><anchor id=a316.3>at &aolig;lðre oc at áte,
    <l><anchor id=a316.4>á þinge oc á þióð-stefno,
    <l><anchor id=a316.5>at circna sócn oc í conongs húse,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a316.6>oc hver-vetna þess es manna-funder verða, þá scolot it svá sam-sátter, <anchor id=a316.7>sem aldregi h&oeacute;fesc þetta yccar á meðal.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a316.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> It scolot

<lg>
    <l>Deila kníf oc k&oelig;t-stycce,
    <l><anchor id=a316.9>oc alla hlute yccar í miðle
    <l><anchor id=a316.10>sem frændr en eige sem fiándr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
</lg>

<p n=2.4><anchor id=a316.11><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ef sacar g&oelig;rasc síðan á miðle þeirra, annat an þat es vel es:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a316.12>Þær<note place=apparatus id=an316.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þær]</ab> H; þat, Cd.</note> scal fé b&oeacute;ta, en eige flein rióða.
</lg>


<p n=2.5><anchor id=a316.13><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> En sá yccarr es

<lg>
    <l>gengr á g&oelig;rvar sátter,
    <l><anchor id=a316.14>eða vegr á veittar trygðer.
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a316.15>Þá scal hann

<lg>
    <l>svá víða vargr <hi>v</hi>ræcr oc <hi>v</hi>recenn, sem menn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>
                <l rend="indent(8)"><anchor id=a316.16>víðazt varga <hi>v</hi>reca.
    <l><anchor id=a316.17>cristner menn circjor s&oeacute;kja,
    <l><anchor id=a316.18>heiðner menn hof blóta,
    <l><anchor id=a316.19>elldr upp brennr<note place=apparatus id=an316.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> elldar u. brenna, H.</note>, i&aolig;rð gr&oeacute;r,
    <l><anchor id=a316.20>m&aolig;gr móðor callar; oc móðer m&aolig;g f&oeacute;ðer,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>
    <pb id=pb317 n=317><l><anchor id=a317.1>allder elda cynda:
    <l><anchor id=a317.2>scip scríðr, scilder blícja<note place=apparatus id=an317.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> blica, Cd.</note>,
    <l><anchor id=a317.3>sól scínn, snæ leggr,
    <l><anchor id=a317.4>Fiðr scríðr, fura vex,
    <l><anchor id=a317.5>valr flýgr vár-langan dag;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a317.6>stendr hónom byrr beinn und báða vænge:
    <l><anchor id=a317.7>himinn hverfr, heimr es bygðr,
    <l><anchor id=a317.8>vindr þýtr, v&aolig;tn til sævar falla,
    <l><anchor id=a317.9>carlar corne sá.
</lg>

<p n=2.6><anchor id=a317.10><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Hann scal firrasc

<lg>
    <l>circjor oc Cristna menn,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a317.11>Goðs hús [goða hof] oc guma<note place=apparatus id=an317.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> gyma, H.</note>,
    <l><anchor id=a317.12>heim hvern nema Helvíte.
</lg>

<p n=2.7><anchor id=a317.13><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Nú haldet it báðer á bóc einne, enda liggr nú fé á bóc es <anchor id=a317.14>N. N. b&oeacute;ter fyrer sec oc sínn erfingja&mdash;

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a317.15>alenn oc óborenn,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a317.16>getenn oc ógetenn,
    <l><anchor id=a317.17>nefndan oc ónefndan:
</lg>

<p n=2.8><anchor id=a317.18><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> N. N. tecr trygðer, en M. M. veiter&mdash;

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a317.19>mætar trygðer oc megen-trygðer<note place=apparatus id=an317.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mætar ... megen-tr.]</ab> add. H.</note>,
    <l><anchor id=a317.20>Ævin-trygðer, þær es æ scolo haldasc<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a317.21>meðan mold es oc menn lifa.
</lg>

<pb id=pb318 n=318><p n=2.9><anchor id=a318.1><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Nu ero þeir N. N. oc M. M.       sátter oc sam-mála, <anchor id=a318.2>hvarge er<note place=apparatus id=an318.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> hvar sem, Cd.</note> þeir hittasc

<lg>
    <l>á lande eða lege,
    <l><anchor id=a318.3><hi>á</hi> scipe eða á scíðe,
    <l><anchor id=a318.4>í hafe eða á hestz-bace:
    <l><anchor id=a318.5>árar miðla eða aust-scoto,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a318.6>þofto eða þiljo, ef þarfar g&oelig;rvasc.
</lg>

<p n=2.9.1><anchor id=a318.7>Iam-sátter hvárr við annan, sem faðer við son eða sonr við f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a318.8>í sam-f&aolig;rom &aolig;llom.<note place=apparatus id=an318.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Svá sem vin sínn á vatne fiune | eða bróðor sínn á braut hitte, add. G.</note> Nú leggja þeir hendr sínar saman, N. N. oc <anchor id=a318.9>M. M. Haldet vel trygðer, at vilja Cristz oc allra manna þeirra <anchor id=a318.10>es nú heyrðo trygða-mól [H: h&aolig;fom nú lófa-tac at trygða-m&aoacute;lom,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a318.11>oc h&aolig;ldom vel tr. at v. Cr. oc at vitne allra m....].

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a318.12>Hafe sá hylle Goðs [goða], es heldr trygðer
    <l><anchor id=a318.13>en sá greme Goðs<note place=apparatus id=an318.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>greme Goðs]</ab> H; reiðe, Cd.</note> [greme goða], es rýfr réttar trygðer:
    <l><anchor id=a318.14>en hylle sá&apos;s helldr.
    <l><anchor id=a318.15>Hafet heiler sæzc.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a318.16>En ver sém váttar es við erom stadder. [H: en Goð sé <anchor id=a318.17>við alla sáttr.]
</lg>


<p><anchor id=a318.18><hi>Trygða-mál Grág.</hi> (Cd. Reg. = Cd.; Heiðarvíga Saga = H; <anchor id=a318.19>Grettes Saga = G.)



<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=II id=en.ch2.1.2 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>II.</head>

<p n=0.1><hi>Oath of surety</hi> [Christianised after 1001]. A man is given his freedom freely when he is led into the law. The priest <hi>or</hi> gode of whose moot he is must lead him into the law. He must take the cross [<hi>earlier</hi>, the ring] in his hand and name witnesses to witness thereto&mdash;

<p n=0.2>&lsquo;That I take an oath on the cross [ring], a lawful oath, and I say this to God [the Anse] that he [this freedman] will keep the laws as he that keepeth them well, and that he wisheth to be in the law with other men. May God [the gods] be wrath with them that deny this&mdash;unless....&rsquo;

<p n=0.3><hi>The Fifth-Court-oath in appeals</hi> [<hi>founded after 1003, before 1011</hi>]. He shall take a book in his hand, bigger than a neck-book <hi>or</hi> amulet-book, <pb id=pb313a n=313>and name witnesses to himself: That &lsquo;I take the oath on the book, a Fifth-Court-oath: So help me God in this light and the other, as I shall set my suit <hi>or</hi> case up against him (and name him), as I believe it to be most true and most right and most fast to the law, and as I believe him to be truly guilty in this suit that I have set up against him. And I have not offered money in this court to get me help in this suit, and I will offer none. And I have not paid money nor will I pay any whether it be for lawful or unlawful ends.&rsquo;

<p n=0.4><hi>The oath of the two Sootheners named by the principal in the Fifth Doom.</hi> They shall take a book in their hands, bigger than a neck-book <hi>or</hi> amulet-book, and name witnesses to themselves: &lsquo;To witness thereto, that I take an oath on the book, a Fifth-Court-oath, etc. ..., as I believe that N. N. will so pursue his suit against M. M. as he believeth it to be most true, etc.... And as he believed him to be truly guilty, etc.... And he hath not offered money, etc.... And he hath not paid money, etc.&rsquo;

<p n=1.1><hi>The form of peace-making.</hi> <ab type=parNum>1.</ab> &lsquo;All know what hath happened regarding or how it standeth concerning of the feud <hi>or</hi> misunderstanding between N. N. and M. M., but now their friends are come between them and are wishing to set them at one.&rsquo;

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> &lsquo;Now N. N. doth hansel M. M. peace <hi>or</hi> safe conduct to the place of reconciliation which hath been named, on the part of himself and his heirs, and all those men on whose behalf he ought to hansel peace. And M. M. accepteth peace from N. N. on his own behalf and his heirs, and all those men on whose behalf he ought to accept peace.&rsquo;

<pb id=pb314a n=314><p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> &lsquo;And now is God himself the first of them as he is the best, and all his saints, and all halidoms, the pope at Rome, and the patriarch, our king, and our bishops, and all clerks [lit. book-learned men], and all Christian people.&rsquo;

<p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> &lsquo;I name twelve men for this peace between them, N. N. and M. M., that now stand on both sides of the case,&rsquo; and with that he nameth twelve men.

<p n=1.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Then shall the man that speaketh the peace name two witnesses or more to witness to this, &lsquo;that this peace that is now named shall be full and fast between all men that are here come to this meeting <hi>or</hi> summoning of men, and as long as men stay here at this meeting of men, and till every man be come hence to his home. And if there be any further meeting fixed in their case, this peace shall hold until this matter <hi>or</hi> case be so ended as may best be.&rsquo;

<p n=1.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> &lsquo;Now may Earth uphold the peace, and Heaven be its boundary from above, and from without the Red Sea that runneth round about all lands that we know of; and within these end-marks <hi>or</hi> limits that I have now reckoned up before men, may that man never thrive that breaks this peace which I have named here, and may he bind so heavy a burden on him that he shall never get rid of! And that is&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The wrath of the Lord God [the gods] and the name of truce-breaker.
</lg>

<p>But all these men may they have God&apos;s mercy that [MS.: and] hold <pb id=pb315a n=315>well the peace, and all the saints&apos; intercession in all their needs with Almighty God!

<lg>
    <l>God [the gods] be gracious to them that keep this peace,
    <l>But wrathful with them that break this peace!
    <l>Gracious to them that keep it.
    <l>Hail, ye that have handselled peace to each other!&rsquo;
</lg>

<p n=1.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> That was the old <hi>or</hi> heathen law in our land, if a man was outlawed for breach of truce <hi>or</hi> peace, that those twelve men that were named in the peace ought to take the right out of his money, forty-eight ounces.

<p n=1.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> But this is law in Norway and over the Danish tongue, if a man observe not his peace <hi>or</hi> truce, that the man be outlawed throughout Norway, and forfeit both his lands and his moveables, and he shall never come back into the land again.


<p n=2.1><hi>Formula of peace-making.</hi> 1. There was feud between N. N. and M. M., but now they are set at one and many:

<lg>
    <l>As the meter meted,
    <l>And the teller told,
    <l>And the dooms-man deemed,
    <l>And the givers gave,
    <l>And the receivers received
    <l>And carried it away
    <l>With full fee and paid ounce,
    <l>Handselled to them that ought to have it.
</lg>


<pb id=pb316a n=316><p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ye two shall be made men&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>At one and in agreement,
    <l>At feast and food,
    <l>At moot and meeting of the people,
    <l>At church-soken and in the king&apos;s house;
</lg>

<p>[<hi>Originally, In the temple-soken and in the chief&apos;s house</hi>]

<p>And wheresoever men meet,

<p>Ye shall be so reconciled together as that it shall hold for ever     between you.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ye two shall

<lg>
    <l>Share knife and carven steak,
    <l>And all your things between you,
    <l>As friends and not as foes.
</lg>


<p n=2.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> If case of quarrel <hi>or</hi> feud arise between you other than is well,     It shall be booted <hi>or</hi> paid for with money and not by reddening         the dart <hi>or</hi> arrow.


<p n=2.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> And he of you twain that shall go against the settlement <hi>or</hi> atonement made,

<lg>
    <l>Or break the bidden troth,
    <l>He shall be wolf-hunted and to be hunted,
    <l>As far as men hunt wolves:
    <l>Christian men seek churches;
    <l>Heathen men sacrifice in temples;
    <l>Fire burneth; earth groweth;
    <l>Son calleth mother, and mother beareth son;
    <pb id=pb317a n=317><l>Folk kindle fire;
    <l>Ship saileth; shields glint;
    <l>Sun shineth; snow lieth;
    <l>The Fin skateth; the fir groweth;
    <l>The hawk flieth the long spring day,
    <l>With a fair wind behind him on wings outspread;
    <l>Heaven turneth; earth is dwelt on;
    <l>Wind bloweth; waters fall to the sea;
    <l>Churl soweth corn.
</lg>


<p n=2.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> He shall be outcast

<lg>
    <l>From Church and Christian men;
    <l>From God&apos;s house [temples of the gods] and from men;
    <l>From every world save hell-woe <hi>or</hi> torment.
</lg>

<p n=2.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Now do ye two both hold one book [<hi>orig. ring</hi>], and place the money on the book that N. N. payeth for himself and his heirs,

<lg>
    <l>Born and unborn,
    <l>Begotten and unbegotten,
    <l>Named and unnamed,
</lg>

<p n=2.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> N. N. taketh troth <hi>or</hi> truce and M. M. giveth it:

<lg>
    <l>Dear troth and strong troth.
    <l>An everlasting peace that shall hold for ever,
    <l>While the world is and men live.
</lg>

<pb id=pb318a n=318><p n=2.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Now are N. N. and M. M. At peace <hi>or</hi> atonement and accord Wherever they meet,

<lg>
    <l>On land or water,
    <l>On ship or snow-skate,
    <l>On sea or on horseback;
    <l>To share oar and bilge-scoop,
    <l>Bench and bulwark if need be;
    <l>Even set with each other,
    <l>As father with son or son with father,
    <l>In all dealings together.
</lg>


<p n=2.9.1>Now they lay their hands together, N. N. and M. M. Hold well <corr sic=this>these</corr> troths, by the will of Christ and of all those men that have now heard this form of peace:

<lg>
    <l>May he have God&apos;s grace that holdeth these troths <hi>or</hi> truce,
    <l>And he his wrath that breaketh these troths <hi>or</hi> truce,
    <l>And he have grace that holdeth them!
    <l>Hail, ye that are set at one!
    <l>And we that are set as witnesses thereto.&mdash;<hi>Cod. Reg.</hi>
</lg>



<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=III id=ch2.1.3 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.3)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>III.</ab> <hi>Legal Ceremonials.</hi>

<p n=1><anchor id=a318.20>Þat vas upp-haf enna heiðno laga, at menn scyldo eige hafa<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a318.21>h&aolig;foð-scip í haf; en ef þeir hefðe, þá scylde þeir af taca h&aolig;foð, <anchor id=a318.22>áðr þeir kócme í lannz-sýn, oc sigla eige at lande með gapondom<note place=apparatus id=an318.4><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> gapande, gínande, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a319.1><pb id=pb319 n=319>h&aolig;fðom eðr gínondom triónom, svá at land-vætter fæl<hi>ð</hi>esc við.&mdash;<hi>Landn.: <anchor id=a319.2>Hawk&apos;s-bóc</hi>, IV. 13. 2, p. 187.

<p n=2><anchor id=a319.3>Ganga þeir nú út í Eyrar-hváls-odda, oc rísta þar upp or i&aolig;rðo <anchor id=a319.4>iarðar-men, svá at báðer endar vóro faster í i&aolig;rðo, oc setto þar <anchor id=a319.5>under mála-spiót þat er maðr mátte taca hende sínne til geir-nagla,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a319.6>þeir scyldo þar fiórer under ganga, Þórgrímr, Þórkell, Gísle oc <anchor id=a319.7>Vésteinn. Oc nú vekja þeir sér blóð, oc láta renna saman dreyra <anchor id=a319.8>sínn í þeirre moldo es upp vas scoren undan iarðar-meneno, oc <anchor id=a319.9>hr&oeacute;ra saman allt, moldena oc blóðet. En síðan féllo þeir aller á <anchor id=a319.10>kné oc sverja þann eið, at hverr scal annars hefna sem bróðor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a319.11>síns: oc nefna &aolig;ll goðen í vitne; oc er þeir tócoz í hendr aller, <anchor id=a319.12>þá mælte...&mdash;<hi>Gisl. Saga.</hi>

<p n=3><anchor id=a319.13>B. kvasc eige mundo fé-b&oeacute;tr taca, oc þvi at eins sættasc at <anchor id=a319.14>I&aolig;kull gange under þriú iarðar-men, sem þar vas siðr efter stórar <anchor id=a319.15>afgerðer, oc sýna svá lítilæte við mic ... et fyrsta iarðar-men tóc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a319.16>í &aolig;xl; annat í bróc-linda; þriðja í mitt lær. Þá gecc Þórsteinn <anchor id=a319.17>under et fyrsta. B. mælte þá: &lsquo;Svín-beygða-ec nú þann sem &oeacute;ztr <anchor id=a319.18>vas af Vatz-d&oeacute;lom.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Vatzd. Saga</hi>, ch. 33.

<p n=4><anchor id=a319.19>Þat vas þá scírsla í þat mund, at ganga scylde under iarðar-men, <anchor id=a319.20>þat er torfa var risten or velle: scyldo endarner torfonnar vesa<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a319.21>faster í vellenom: en sá maðr er scírslona scylde framm flytja, <anchor id=a319.22>scylde þar ganga under ... þá varð sá scírr es under iarðar-menet <anchor id=a319.23>gecc ef torfan fell eige á hann.&mdash;<hi>Laxd. Saga</hi>, ch. 18.

<pb id=pb320 n=320><p n=5><anchor id=a320.1>Þórsteinn Svorfr fór nú miðlum fiallz oc fi&aolig;ro, oc lagðe under <anchor id=a320.2>sik allan dalenn &aolig;ðrom-megen; er<note place=apparatus id=an320.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>er]</ab> read &lsquo;en.&rsquo;</note> [en] hann ferr til fiallz oc gerer <anchor id=a320.3>þar kenne-marc sem hann com framazt, oc braut þar í sundr camb <anchor id=a320.4>sínn, oc castaðe niðr cam<hi>b</hi>s-brotonom, oc lætr efter silfr, halfa <anchor id=a320.5>m&aolig;rc í hverjom stað, oc es sá rime kallaðr at Cambe; oc nefner<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a320.6>Þórsteinn sér vátta, oc feller hann með því dalenn ser til vistar, oc <anchor id=a320.7>gaf af ser nafn, oc callaðe Svarfaðar-dal.&mdash;<hi>Svarfd. Saga</hi> <anchor id=a320.8>(beginning).

<p n=6><anchor id=a320.9>Ec skal stefna hónom af goðorðeno.... Hoscullr mælte: &lsquo;Ver <anchor id=a320.10>scolom rióða oss í goða blóte<note place=apparatus id=an320.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>blóte]</ab> emend.; blóðe, Cd.; <hi>read</hi>, ráða oss í goða-blóte?</note> at fornom sið,&rsquo;&mdash;oc hió hrút einn, oc<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a320.11>callaðe ser goðorð Arnsteins, oc rauð hendrnar í blóðe hrútzens.&mdash;<hi>Liosv. <anchor id=a320.12>Saga</hi>, § 1.

<p n=7><anchor id=a320.13>Þat var þeirra átrúnaðr, ef málit genge mis-iamt [<hi>or</hi> úiamt]<note place=apparatus id=an320.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> mis-iamt <hi>or</hi> úiamt] emend.; saman, Cd.</note> þá <anchor id=a320.14>es optarr væri reynt, at þess mannz ráð mynde saman ganga, ef <anchor id=a320.15>mál-v&aolig;ndrenn þyrre, en þróazc, ef hann visse til mikilleiks: gecc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a320.16>nú málet saman, oc var þrimr sinnum reynt.&mdash;<hi>Corm. Saga</hi>, ch. 1.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=III id=en.ch2.1.3 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>III.</head>

<p n=1>This was the beginning of the heathen laws, that men must not keep a ship at sea with a figure-head on; but if they have, then they must take off the head before they come in sight of land, and not sail to land <pb id=pb319a n=319>with gaping heads and yawning jaws to frighten the spirits <hi>or</hi> wights of the country.

<p n=2><hi>Sworn brotherhood.</hi> Now they walked out to Eyre-knoll-edge, and raised up <hi>or</hi> cut out of the earth an <hi>earth-necklace</hi>, so that both ends [<hi>of the strip of turf</hi>] were fast to the earth, and under it they put a graven spear, such that a man might touch the spear-nail <hi>or</hi> blade-rivet with his hand. They four&mdash;N, M, O, P&mdash;were to go under it. And now they let themselves blood, and let their gore run together into the mould that was laid bare under the earth-necklace, and stirred altogether, the mould and the blood. And then they all fell on their knees and swore an oath, that every one should avenge the other like his own brother, and named all the gods to witness, and as they grasped each other&apos;s hands...&mdash;<hi>Gisl. Saga.</hi>

<p n=3><hi>Subjugation.</hi> B. said that he would not take money-boot, nor be set at one with I. unless he went under the earth-necklace [or strip of turf], as was then the custom after great offences, and so show his humility towards one. [<hi>I. refused, but his brother Th. offered to do so for him.</hi>] The first earth-necklace reached to his shoulder, the second the breech-belt, the third to mid-thigh. When Th. went under the first, B. said, &lsquo;Now I have hog-backed him that was the greatest of the Water-dales-men.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Vatzd. Saga</hi>, ch. 33.

<p n=4>It was then an ordeal in those days to go under the earth-necklace, wherein a strip of turf was cut out of the field, but each end of the turf must be fast to the field, and the man that did the ordeal had to go under.... And he was cleared that went under the earth-necklace, if the turf did not fall upon him.&mdash;<hi>Laxd. Saga</hi>, ch. 18.

<pb id=pb320a n=320><p n=5><hi rend=sc>Thor-stan Swarfad</hi> now went between fell and foreshore, and took unto himself the whole dale on both sides, and he went to the fell and there where he reached <hi>or</hi> came first he made a token-mark and broke his comb asunder there, and cast down the broken comb, and left behind him silver, a half-mark in each place. And this strip is called Comb; and Thor-stan named witness to himself, and he laid claim to the dale thereby, and gave it his name, and called it Swarfad-dale.&mdash;<hi>Svarfd. Saga.</hi>

<p n=6><hi>Taking up a gode-hood.</hi> I shall summons him on the gode-hood <hi>or</hi> priest&apos;s-hood.... Haus-coll spake: &lsquo;Let us perform a gode-sacrifice [emend.] after the old <hi>or</hi> heathen way.&rsquo; And he slaughtered [lit. hewed] a ram and claimed the gode-hood of Arn-stan, and reddened his hands in the blood of the ram.&mdash;<hi>Liosv. Saga</hi>, § 1.

<p n=7><hi>Divination by the Rod or Rhabdomancy.</hi> It was their faith, if a measure went uneven when it was measured more than once [lit. after] that that man&apos;s place should shrink [i. e. fail] together, if the mete-wand made it shrink, but thrive if it turned out bigger; the measure kept shrinking, and it was thrice tried.&mdash;<hi>Corm. Saga</hi>, ch. 1.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=IV id=ch2.1.4 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.4)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>IV.</ab> <hi>Holm-gang, or Wager of  Battle.</hi>

<p n=0><anchor id=a320.17>Þat vóro holmg&aolig;ngo-l&aolig;g, at feldr scal vesa fimm álna í scaut, <anchor id=a320.18>oc lyckjor í hornom; scylde þar setja niðr hæla þá, es h&aolig;foð vas <anchor id=a320.19>á &aolig;ðrom enda&mdash;þat héto &lsquo;tiosnor.&rsquo; Sá es um bió, scylde ganga at <anchor id=a320.20>tiosnonom, svá at sæe himen miðle fóta ser, oc hélde í eyr<hi>n</hi>a-snepla,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a321.1><pb id=pb321 n=321>með þeim for-mála.... Síðan vas frameð blót þat<note place=apparatus id=an321.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Síðan vas fr. bl. þat]</ab> emend.; með þ. form, sem síðan es efter hafðr í blóte því, at call, es t., etc., Cd.</note> es callat <anchor id=a321.2>es tiosno-blót.

<p n=1><anchor id=a321.3><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Þrír reitar scolo um-hverfiss feldenn fetz breiðer: út frá reitom <anchor id=a321.4>scolo vesa stengr fiórar<note place=apparatus id=an321.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> strenger iiij, Cd.</note>,&mdash;oc heita þat h&aolig;slor. Þat es v&aolig;llr haslaðr <anchor id=a321.5>es svá es g&oelig;rt.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=2><anchor id=a321.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Maðr scal hafa þriá sci&aolig;ldo; en es þeir <hi>&lsquo;ro</hi> farner, þá scal <anchor id=a321.7>ganga á feld, þó at áðr hafe af h&aolig;rfat; þá scal hlífaz með vápnom <anchor id=a321.8>þaðan frá.

<p n=3><anchor id=a321.9><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Sá scal fyrr h&oelig;ggva es á es scorat<note place=apparatus id=an321.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es scorat]</ab> om. Cd.</note>.

<p n=4><anchor id=a321.10><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ef annarr verðr sárr, svá at blóð come á feld, es eigi scylt at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a321.11>berjasc lengr.

<p n=5><anchor id=a321.12><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Ef maðr stígr &aolig;ðrom f&oeacute;te út um h&aolig;slor, ferr hann á hæl, en <anchor id=a321.13>rennr ef b&aoacute;ðom stígr.

<p n=6><anchor id=a321.14><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Sínn maðr scal halda scilde firer hv&aoacute;rom þeim es bersc.

<p n=7><anchor id=a321.15><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Sá scal gialda holms-lausn es meirr verðr sárr, þriár mercr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a321.16>silfrs í holm-lausn.&mdash;<hi>Corm. Saga</hi>, ch. 10.

<p n=8><anchor id=a321.17>Þar var leiddr framm graðungr micell oc gamall: þat vas callat <anchor id=a321.18>blót-naut; þat scylde sá h&oelig;ggva er sigr hefðe: vas þat stundom <anchor id=a321.19>eitt naut, stundom lét sítt hvárr fram leiða sá es á holm geck.&mdash;<hi>Egil&apos;s <anchor id=a321.20>Saga</hi>, ch. 68.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=9><anchor id=a321.21>En þó vóro þat l&aolig;g í þann tíma at bióða holm-g&aolig;ngo sá es van-hluta <anchor id=a321.22>þóttesc verða fyr &aolig;ðrom.&mdash;<hi>Gunnl. Saga</hi> (A. B).



<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=IV id=en.ch2.1.4 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>IV.</head>

<p n=0><hi>The law of Holm-gang, or Wager of Battle.</hi> It was the law of wager of battle that there should be a cloak of five ells in the skirt and loops at the corners. They must put down pegs with heads on one end that were called Tiosnos. He that was performing must go to the Tiosnos so that the sky could be seen between his legs, holding the lobes of his ears, <pb id=pb321a n=321>with this form of words [form lost], and afterwards was performed in the sacrifice that is called <hi>Tiosno-sacrifice</hi>.

<p n=1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> There must be three lines round about the cloak of a foot breadth; outside the lines there must be four posts, and they are called <hi>hazels</hi>, and the field is <hi>hazelled</hi> when this is done.

<p n=2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> A man shall have three shields, and when they are gone then he shall step on to the skin though he have left it before, and then he must defend himself with weapon henceforth.

<p n=4><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> He shall strike first that is challenged.

<p n=5><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> If one of them be wounded so that blood come on the cloak, they shall not fight any longer.

<p n=5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> If a man step with one foot outside the hazels he is said to flinch [lit. goes on his heel]; but if he step outside with both feet, he is said to run.

<p n=6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> His own man shall hold the shield for each of them that fight.

<p n=7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> He shall pay holm-ransom that is the more wounded, three marks of silver as holm-ransom.&mdash;<hi>Corm. Saga</hi>, ch. 10.

<p n=8><hi>The Tiosno-sacrifice.</hi> There was led forth a steer, great and old. It was called the Beast of Sacrifice. He shall strike it that had the victory. There was sometimes one beast; sometimes each that went on the holm would lead forth his own.&mdash;<hi>Egil&apos;s Saga</hi>, ch. 68.

<p n=9>Now it was still law at that time [after 1001] for him that thought himself ill-treated by another to challenge him to wager of battle.&mdash;<hi>Gunnl. Saga.</hi>


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb322 n=322>
<div2 n=V id=ch2.1.5 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.5)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>V.</ab> <hi>Criminal Law.</hi></head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a322.1>Þat vóro l&aolig;g í þann tíma, ef maðr drap þræl fyrer manne: at sá <anchor id=a322.2>maðr scylde f&oeacute;ra heim þræls-gi&aolig;ld, oc hefja ferð sína fyrer ena <anchor id=a322.3>þriðjo sól efter víg þrælsens: þat skyldo vesa tolf aurar silfrs. Oc <anchor id=a322.4>ef þræls gi&aolig;ld vóro at l&aolig;gom f&oeacute;rð, þá vas eige sócn til um víg <anchor id=a322.5>þrælsens.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb. Saga</hi>, ch. 43.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=2><anchor id=a322.6>Nátt-víg ero morð-víg.&mdash;<hi>Egil&apos;s Saga.</hi>

<p n=3><anchor id=a322.7>Þat vas þá mælt, at sá være scyldr at hefna, es vápne kipðe or <anchor id=a322.8>sáre; en þat vóro c&aolig;lloð laun-víg en ecke morð, es menn léto <anchor id=a322.9>v&aoacute;pn efter í benenne standa.&mdash;<hi>Gisl. Saga.</hi>

<list>
    <item>Ef menn setja menn í út-scer: sá maðr heiter scer-nár.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
    <item>Ef maðr es settr í gr&aolig;f: oc heiter sá graf-nár.
    <item>Ef maðr es f&oeacute;rðr á fiall eða í hella: sá heiter fiall-nár.
    <item>Ef maðr es hengðr: oc heiter sá galg-nár.&mdash;<hi>Grag. St.</hi> § 360.
</list>

<p n=4><anchor id=a322.10><hi>Níð.</hi> En ef noccorer coma eigi, þá scal þeim reisa níð, með <anchor id=a322.15>þeim for-mála, at hann scal vesa hvers mannz níðingr, oc vesa<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a322.16>hverge í samlage góðra manna; hafa goða greme oc grið-níðings <anchor id=a322.17>nafn.&mdash;<hi>Vatzd. Saga</hi>, ch. 33.

<p n=5><anchor id=a322.18>Þeir tóco súlo eina ... I&aolig;kull scar carls-h&aolig;fuð á súlo-endanom, <anchor id=a322.19>oc reist á rúnar með &aolig;llom þeim formála sem fyrr vas sagðr; <anchor id=a323.1><pb id=pb323 n=323>eíðan drap I&aolig;kull mere eina, oc opnoðo hána hiá briósteno, oc <anchor id=a323.2>f&oeacute;rðo á súlona, oc léto horfa heim at Borg.&mdash;<hi>Vatzd. Saga,</hi> ch. 34.

<p n=6><anchor id=a323.3>Hann toc í h&aolig;nd ser hesliss-st&aolig;ng oc geck á berg-sn&aolig;s nockora <anchor id=a323.4>þá es visse til lannz inn: þá tóc hann hross-h&aolig;foð, oc sette upp á <anchor id=a323.5>st&aolig;ngena. Síðan veitte hann for-mála oc mælte:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=7><anchor id=a323.6>&lsquo;Her set-ec upp níðst&aolig;ng, oc sný-ec þesso níðe á h&aolig;nd N. N. <anchor id=a323.7>oc M. M.&rsquo;&mdash;Hann sn&oelig;re hross-h&aolig;fðeno inn á land.&mdash;&lsquo;Sný-ec <anchor id=a323.8>þesso níðe á land-vætter þær es þetta land byggja, svá at allar fare <anchor id=a323.9>þær villar vega: enge hende né hitte sítt inne, fyrr an þær reka <anchor id=a323.10>N. N. oc M. M. or lande.&rsquo; Síðan scýtr hann st&aolig;ngenne niðr í biarg-rifo,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a323.11>oc lét þar standa.&mdash;<hi>Egil&apos;s Saga</hi>, ch. 60.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb322a n=322>
<div2 n=V id=en.ch2.1.5 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>V.</head>

<p n=1><hi>Manslaughter, degrees of.</hi> It was law at that time, if a man slew another man&apos;s thrall, that that man should bring him <hi>thralls-gild</hi>, and start on his way therewith before the third sun after the slaughter of the thrall. It should be twelve ounces of silver, and if the <hi>thralls-gild</hi> was lawfully paid there was no action for the slaughter of the thrall.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb. Saga</hi>. ch. 43.

<p n=2>To slay by night is murder, <hi>or</hi> it is murder to slay by night.&mdash;<hi>Egil&apos;s Saga.</hi>

<p n=3>It was then law that he was bound to revenge that took the weapon out of the wound, and it was <hi rend=sc>secret slaying</hi>, but not <hi rend=sc>murder</hi>, when men left their weapons standing in the wounds.&mdash;<hi>Gisl. Saga.</hi>


<list>
    <item>If a man be put (for execution) on a rock in the sea, he is called a <hi rend=sc>skerry-corse</hi>.
    <item>If he be put in a pit, <hi rend=sc>grave-corse</hi>.
    <item>If he be [thrown over] a mountain or shut up in a cave, he is called <hi rend=sc>fell-corse</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>cliff-corse</hi>.
    <item>If he be hanged, he is called <hi rend=sc>gallows-corse</hi>.
</list>


<p n=4><hi>Libel.</hi> But if one come not, then nith <hi>or</hi> ill-fame shall be raised against him with this form of words, &lsquo;that he shall be every man&apos;s niddering, and never be in the fellowship of good men, and have the wrath of the gods, and the name of a truce-breaker&rsquo; [lit. grith-niddering].&mdash;<hi>Vatzd. Saga</hi>, ch. 33.

<p n=5>They took a pillar ... Iokle cut a man&apos;s head on the pillar&apos;s end, and raised <hi>or</hi> wrote runes with all that form of words that was aforesaid<corr sic=",">.</corr> <pb id=pb323a n=323>Then Iokle slew a mare, and opened her close to the breast-bone, and put her up on the pillar, and made it turn towards Borg.&mdash;<hi>Vatzd. Saga</hi>, ch. 34.

<p n=6>He took a hazel-pole in his hand, and went to a jutting rock that looked landward. Then he took a horse-head and set it up on a pole. Then he spake a form of words, saying, &lsquo;Here I set up a nith-pole, and I turn this nith upon the hands of N. N. and M. M.&rsquo; He turned the horse-head in landwards. &lsquo;I turn this nith upon the land-wights <hi>or</hi> spirits that dwell in this land, so that all they go astray and none light on his home until they drive N. N. and M. M. out of the land.&rsquo; Then he stuck the pole down into a chink in the rock, and let it stand there.&mdash;<hi>Egil&apos;s Saga,</hi> ch. 60.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=VI id=ch2.1.6 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.6)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>VI.</ab> <hi>Family Law.</hi></head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a323.12>Þá es Ni&aolig;rðr vas með V&aolig;nom, þá hafðe hann átta systor sína, <anchor id=a323.13>þvi at þat vóro þar l&aolig;g.... En þat vas bannat með Ásom at <anchor id=a323.14>byggja svá náet at frændseme.&mdash;<hi>Yngl. Saga.</hi>

<p n=2><anchor id=a323.15>Oc þat vas þá siðvanðe noccorr, es land vas allt al-heiðet, at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a323.16>þeir menn es fé-litler vóro, en stóð ómegð mioc til handa, léto út <anchor id=a323.17>bera b&aolig;rn sín; oc þótte þó ílla g&oelig;rt ofallt.&mdash;<hi>Gunnl. Saga.</hi>

<p n=3><anchor id=a323.18>Cné-sett hefer þú hann nú (seger Haukr) oc máttú myrða hann <anchor id=a323.19>ef þú vill.&mdash;<hi>Kringla</hi> (Hac. S. Góða).

<p n=4><anchor id=a323.20>Þat barn es cvict es orðet í cviðe móðorenne áðr henne sé frelse<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a323.21>gefet ... sá maðr heiter <hi>hrísungr</hi>.

<p n=5><anchor id=a323.22>Ef cona gefr frelse þræle sínom til þess at hon vill ganga með <anchor id=a324.1><pb id=pb324 n=324>hónom oc eiga hann, þá es þat barn oc eige arf-gengt es þau geta: <anchor id=a324.2>sá heiter <hi>hornungr</hi>.

<p n=6><anchor id=a324.3>Þat barn ... es kona sú getr es sec es orðen scógar-maðr, þó at <anchor id=a324.4>hon gete með sínom boanda ósecjom: oc heiter sá <hi>bæsingr</hi>.

<p n=7><anchor id=a324.5>Þat barn ... es sá maðr getr es secr es orðenn scógar-maðr, þó at<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a324.6>hann gete við cono sínne sialfs: sá maðr heiter <hi>varg-drope</hi>.&mdash;<hi>Arfa <anchor id=a324.7>þáttr</hi>, p. 224.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=VI id=en.ch2.1.6 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>VI.</head>

<p n=1>When Nerth was with the Wanes he had his sister to wife, for that was their law.... But so near an affinity was forbidden among the Anses.&mdash;<hi>Yngl. Saga.</hi>

<p n=2>And there was then a certain use and wont, when the land was all heathen, for them that were of small means and had many helpless on their hands to expose their children, yet it was always thought mean <hi>or</hi> wicked.&mdash;<hi>Gunnl. Saga.</hi>

<p n=3>&lsquo;Thou hast set him on thy knee now, and thou canst murder him if thou will,&rsquo; c. 930, said by Hawk to king Ethelstan.&mdash;<hi>Kringla</hi> (Hac. S.).

<p n=4>If a child be engendered in the mother&apos;s womb ere she be made free, that child is called <hi rend=sc>rushing</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>rush-begotten</hi>.

<p n=5>If a woman give freedom to her slave in order that she may consort <pb id=pb324a n=324>with him and take him as husband, that child cannot be a lawful heir that they beget, and is called <hi rend=sc>horning</hi>.

<p n=6>The child that a woman bear after she is outlawed, though he be begotten by her sackless husband, is called <hi rend=sc>bastard</hi>.

<p n=7>The child that a man begets after he is made an outlaw, though he beget him on his own wife, is called <hi rend=sc>wolf-drop</hi>.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=VII id=ch2.1.7 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.7)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>VII.</ab> <hi>Wicking Law.</hi></head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a324.8><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Þat vas upp-haf laga þeirra, at þengat scylde einge maðr <anchor id=a324.9>ráðasc sá es ellre være an fimmt&oelig;gr<note place=apparatus id=an324.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> fimmtogr, so also Cod. Arna-Magn.; read sex-togr.</note>: oc einge yngre an átián <anchor id=a324.10>vettra: þar á meðal scyldo aller vesa.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=2><anchor id=a324.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hvártke scylde því ráða frændseme, þó at þeir menn vilde <anchor id=a324.12>þangat ráðasc es eige være í þeim l&aolig;gom<note place=apparatus id=an324.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þó at þeir menn ...]</ab> thus Cd.; Cod. Arna-Magn. has nothing answering to clause 2.</note>.

<p n=3><anchor id=a324.13><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Enge maðr scylde þar renna fyre iam-víglegom oc <anchor id=a324.14>iam-búnom.

<p n=4><anchor id=a324.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hverr scylde þar annars hefna sem bróðor síns.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=5><anchor id=a324.16><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Enge scylde þar &oeacute;ðro-orð mæla né kvíða ne einom hlut; <anchor id=a324.17>hvege óvænt sem um þ&oeacute;tte.

<p n=6><anchor id=a324.18><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Allt þat es þeir fenge í her-f&aolig;rom, þá scylde til stangar bera, <anchor id=a324.19>minna hlut oc meira, þat es fé-mætt være; oc ef hann hefðe þat <anchor id=a324.20>eige g&oelig;rt, þá scylde hann í brauto verða.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=7><anchor id=a324.21><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Enge scylde þar róg cveycva.

<p n=8><anchor id=a324.22><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En ef tíðende fregnðesc, þá scylde einge svá hvat-víss, at þau <anchor id=a324.23>scylde í hávaða segja; þvi <hi>at</hi> Palna-Tóce scylde þar &aolig;ll tíðende segja.

<pb id=pb325 n=325><p n=9><anchor id=a325.1><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Eingi maðr scylde cono hafa í borgena.

<p n=10><anchor id=a325.2><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Oc eingi í braut vesa þrimr nóttom lengr.

<p n=11><anchor id=a325.3><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Oc þó at við þeim manne være tecet, es veget hefðe f&aolig;ðor <anchor id=a325.4>eða bróðor þess mannz es þar være áðr, eða naccvarn náenn mann, <anchor id=a325.5>oc c&oeacute;me þat síðarr upp<note place=apparatus id=an325.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> síðan upp es, Cd.</note>, an við hónom være tecet, þá scylde Palna-Tóce<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a325.6>þat allt d&oeacute;ma, oc hvatce mis-sætte annat es þeirra yrðe, á miðle. <anchor id=a325.7><hi>Jomsv. Saga</hi> (Cod. Holm.).

<p n=12><anchor id=a325.8>Þat vas rícra manna siðr, conunga eða iarla, várra iafningja, at <anchor id=a325.9>þeir l&aoacute;go í hernaðe, oc &aolig;floðo ser fiár oc frama; oc scylde þat fé <anchor id=a325.10>eige til arfs telja, né sonr efter f&aolig;ðor taca, heldr scylde þat fé í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a325.11>haug leggja hiá si&aolig;lfom þeim.&mdash;<hi>Vatzd. Saga</hi>, ch. 2.

<p n=12.1><anchor id=a325.12><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Enge þeirra scylde hafa lengra sverð an alnar, svá scylde nær <anchor id=a325.13>ganga. Þeir léto g&oelig;ra s&aolig;x til þess at þá scylde h&oelig;ggen st&oeacute;re.

<p n=12.2><anchor id=a325.14><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Aldrigi her-tóco þeir conor né b&aolig;rn.

<p n=12.3><anchor id=a325.15><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Enge scylde s&aoacute;r binda fyr an at iam-lengð annars dags.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=12.4><anchor id=a325.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Enge þeirra hafðe minna afl an xij [<hi>read</hi> ii] meðal-menn.

<p n=12.5><anchor id=a325.17><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Við &oelig;ngom vas þeim tecet es minne vas at afle eðr hreyste an <anchor id=a325.18>nú vas sagt.

<p n=12.6><anchor id=a325.19><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þat vas siðr þeirra at liggja iamnan fyrer annesjom.

<p n=12.7><anchor id=a325.20><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þat vas annarr siðr þeirra, at tialda aldrigi á scipom, oc aldrigi<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a325.21>hefla segl<note place=apparatus id=an325.2><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hefla segl]</ab>, emend.; half segl, Cd.</note> fyrer of-viðre.

<p n=12.8><anchor id=a325.22><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þeir vóro callaðer Álfs-reckar, oc hafðe hann aldregi fleire á <anchor id=a325.23>scipe an sextige [<hi lang=en-UK>read</hi>, oc scylde enge vesa a scipe ellre an sext&oelig;gr].

<pb id=pb326 n=326><p n=13><anchor id=a326.1>Þá vas þat ráðs teket at hluta menn fyr borð at fara. Enn es <anchor id=a326.2>þeir stigo fyrer borð, mælto þeir: &lsquo;Strálaust es fyr stockom.&rsquo;&mdash; <hi>Half&apos;s <anchor id=a326.3>Saga.</hi>

<p n=14><anchor id=a326.4>Þótte sá einn með fullo mega heita sæ-conongr, es hann svaf <anchor id=a326.5>aldregi under sótcom áse, oc dracc aldrege at árens-horne.&mdash;<hi>Yngl.</hi><ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a326.6><hi>Saga</hi>, ch. 34.

<p n=15><anchor id=a326.7>R&aolig;gnvaldr conongr vas þá mestr her-conungr<note place=apparatus id=an326.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> herm&rcomb;, Cd.</note> í Vestr-l&aolig;ndom.

<p><anchor id=a326.8>Þat vas þriá vetr es hann lá úte á her-scipom, svá at hann com <anchor id=a326.9>eige under sótcan raft.&mdash;<hi>Orkn. Saga</hi>, p. 225.

<p n=16><anchor id=a326.10>Enge maðr scylde vesa á Ormenom Langa ellre an sex-t&oelig;gr, eða<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a326.11>yngre an tví-t&oelig;gr.&mdash;<hi>Ol. Saga Tr.</hi>

<p n=17><anchor id=a326.12>Um kveldet es full scylde drecca, þa vas þat siðvenja cononga <anchor id=a326.13>þeirra es at l&aolig;ndom s&aoacute;to, eða<note place=apparatus id=an326.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eða]</ab> read, at.</note> veizlom es þeir léto g&oelig;ra, at drecca <anchor id=a326.14>scylde á kveldom tví-menning, hvárr ser carl-maðr oc cona, svá sem <anchor id=a326.15>ynnesc, en þeir ser es fleire være saman. En þat vóro vícinga l&aolig;g,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a326.16>þótt þeir være at veizlom, at drecca sveitar-dryccjo.&mdash;<hi>Yngl. Saga.</hi>

<p n=18><anchor id=a326.17>Þá scaut Steinþórr spióte at fornom sið til heilla ser, yfir flocc <anchor id=a326.18>Snorra, en spióteð leitaðe ser staðar.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb.</hi> ch. 44.

<p n=19><anchor id=a326.19>Sá selde hónom reyr-sprota í h&aolig;nd oc bað hann scióta hónom <anchor id=a326.20>yfer lið Styrbiarnar; oc þat scylde hann mæla: &lsquo;Óðinn á yðr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a326.21>alla.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Flatb.</hi> ii. 72.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=VII id=en.ch2.1.7 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>VII.</head>

<p n=1><hi>Wicking Law.</hi> 1. This was the beginning of their law, that there should no man enter that was older than fifty [sixty], and none younger than eighteen winters. All must be between those ages.

<p n=2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Never should kinship be taken account of when they wished to enter that were not in their league.

<p n=3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> No man there should run before a man of like power or like arms.

<p n=4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Every man there should avenge the other as he would his brother.

<p n=5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> None then should there speak a word of fear or dread of anything however perilous things might be.

<p n=6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> All that they took in warfare should be brought to the stang <hi>or</hi> pole, little or big, that was of any value; and if a man had not done this he must be driven out.

<p n=7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> None there should kindle discussion <hi>or</hi> waken quarrel.

<p n=8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> And if tidings came no man should be so rash as to tell it to any one, but all tidings should be told to P. T. [the captain].

<pb id=pb325a n=325><p n=9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> No man should bring a woman into the fort.

<p n=10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> And none should be abroad three nights together.

<p n=11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> And though one had been taken <hi>into fellowship</hi> that had slain father or brother of a man that was there before, or any near kinsman, and it was found out after he was received, then P. T. should judge the whole case and whatever other quarrel might arise between them.&mdash;<hi>Jomsv. Saga.</hi>

<p n=12>It was noblemen&apos;s custom, kings&apos; and earls&apos;, our peers, that they lay out in warfare, and gained fee and fame, and this fee should not be counted with the heritage, nor should the son take it after the father, but it should be laid in the barrow by themselves.&mdash;<hi>Vatzd. Saga.</hi>

<p n=12.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> No man should have a sword longer than an ell, so close were they to go; [and] they had saxes <hi>or</hi> knives made to this end that the blow should be heavier.

<p n=12.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> They never took prisoners women nor children.

<p n=12.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> &dagger;No man should bind a wound till the same hour the next day.

<p n=12.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> No man of them had less strength than two ordinary men.

<p n=12.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> No man was taken that was of less strength and valour than was just said.

<p n=12.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> It was their custom to lie ever outside the nesses.

<p n=12.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> &dagger;It was another custom of theirs never to put awnings on their ships, and never to furl the sail for the wind.

<p n=12.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> They were called <hi rend=sc>Alf&apos;s-renks</hi> or <hi rend=sc>Alf&apos;s-champions</hi>, and none should be older than sixty aboard his ship.

<pb id=pb326a n=326><p n=13>It was then settled that men should cast lots to be cast overboard, and when they leapt overboard they would say, &lsquo;No straw-made bed outside the ship&apos;s berths.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Half&apos;s Saga.</hi>

<p n=14>He only might with full truth be called a <hi>sea-king</hi> that never slept under a sooty rafter, and never drank in the chimney-corner.&mdash;<hi>Yngl. Saga</hi>, ch. 34.

<p n=15>King Rogn-wald was then the greatest war-king in the Western lands. It was three winters he had lain out in his war-ships without coming under a smoky rafter.&mdash;<hi>Orkn. Saga</hi>, p. 225.

<p n=16>No man should be on the Long Serpent that was older than sixty or younger than twenty.&mdash;<hi>Ol. Saga Tr.</hi>

<p n=17>In the evening, when the toasts were drunk, it was the use and wont of kings when they sat at home or at feasts which they had made, that folk should in the evening drink two together [in pairs], man and woman together, as far as could be, but they that were over drunk together. But it was wicking-law when they were at feasts to drink in companies [each crew together].&mdash;<hi>Yngl. Saga.</hi>

<p n=18><hi>Fecial Law.</hi> Then Stan-thor shot a spear in heathen fashion <hi>or</hi> wise for luck over Snorre&apos;s company, but the spear found its goal.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb.</hi> ch. 44.

<p n=19>He gave him a reed-wand in his hand and bade him shoot it over Styr-beorn&apos;s crew, and he was to say as he did so, &lsquo;Woden shall have you all.&rsquo;&mdash;<hi>Flatb.</hi> ii. 72.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb327 n=327>
<div2 n=VIII id=ch2.1.8 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.8)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>VIII.</ab> <hi>Merchant Law</hi>.</head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a327.1>Þat vas þá caupmanna siðr, at hafa eige mat-sveina; en sialfer <anchor id=a327.2>m&aolig;to-nautar hlutaðo með ser, hverr búðar-v&aolig;rð scylde halda dag <anchor id=a327.3>frá dege.

<p n=2><anchor id=a327.4>Þá scyldo oc aller sciparar eiga drycc saman, oc scylde ker <anchor id=a327.5>standa við siglo es dryccrenn vas í, oc loc yfer kereno, en sumr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a327.6>dryccr vas í verplom, oc vas þaðan b&oeacute;tt í keret, svá sem or vas <anchor id=a327.7>druccet.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb.</hi> ch. 39.

<p n=3><anchor id=a327.8>Í þann tíð es Cristne com út hingat til Íslannz gecc her silfr <anchor id=a327.9>í allar stór-sculder, bleict silfr, oc scylde halda scor, oc vesa meire <anchor id=a327.10>hlute silfrs, oc svá sleget, at lx penninga g&oelig;rðe eyre vegenn; oc<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a327.11>vas þá allt eitt, talet oc veget. Þat vas iam-miket fé callat, c silfrs <anchor id=a327.12>sem iiij hundrað oc xx alna vaðmála oc verð<hi>r</hi><note place=apparatus id=an327.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> v<hi rend=sup>s</hi>ð, Cd.</note> þá at halfre m&aolig;rc <anchor id=a327.13>vaðmála eyrer.&mdash;<hi>Cod. Reg.</hi>, p. 174 b.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb327a n=327>
<div2 n=VIII id=en.ch2.1.8 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>VIII.</head>

<p n=1><hi>Chapman&apos;s Law.</hi> It was then the way with chapmen to have no cook [lit. meat-swain], but the messmates cast lots among themselves who should do the house-keeping [lit. booth-keeping] day by day.

<p n=2>And all the crew would have their drink in common, and a kettle <hi>or</hi> butt should stand by the sail <hi>or</hi> mast [i. e. in the waist] which the drink was in, and a lid over the kettle <hi>or</hi> butt; but some of the drink was in tubs, and the butt was filled thence as it was drunk out.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb.</hi> ch. 39.

<p n=3>At the time when Christendom came out hither to Iceland, silver passed here in all great payments, white <hi>or</hi> blanched silver; and it must stand cutting, and be the greater part of silver, and so struck that sixty pennies made an ounce weight, and it was all one told <hi>or</hi> weighed.

<p n=4>It was called <hi>or</hi> proclaimed equal money 120 in silver and 480 and<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> ells in wadmal, and then the ounce stands at half a mark of wadmal.&mdash;<hi>Cod. Reg.</hi>, p. 174 b.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=IX id=ch2.1.9 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.9)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>IX.</ab> <hi>Constitutional History</hi>.</head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a327.20>Þórsteinn Ingolfs son lét setja fyrstr manna þing á Kialar-nese, <anchor id=a327.15>áðr Alþinge være<note place=apparatus id=an327.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> var, Cd.</note> sett, við ráð Helga Biólu oc Erlygs at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a327.16>Esjoberge, oc annarra vitra manna. Oc fylger þar enn s&aolig;com <anchor id=a327.17>(þess) því goðorðe Alþinges-helgan. Þórkell Máne l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr <anchor id=a327.18>vas son Þórsteins Ingolfs sonar. Þórmóðr vas son Þórkels, es þá <anchor id=a328.1><pb id=pb328 n=328>vas Alls-herjar-goðe es Cristne com á Ísland. Þórgeirr Liósvet&shy;nínga <anchor id=a328.2>goðe vas þá l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr.&mdash;<hi>Mela-bóc.</hi>

<p n=2><anchor id=a328.3>Svá sagðe vitr maðr Þórmóðr, es þá vas allz-herjar-goðe es Cristne <anchor id=a328.4>com á Ísland<note place=apparatus id=an328.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es þá vas ... Ísland]</ab> H; es allz h. g. var á Islande, M.</note>, at með þessom orðom oc þing-m&aolig;rkom helgaðo <anchor id=a328.5>lang-feðgar hans Alþinge.&mdash;[<hi>The formula missing.</hi>]&mdash;<hi>Mela-bóc.</hi><ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=3><anchor id=a328.6>Þá vas landeno scift í fiórðunga, oc scyldo vesa þriú þíng í <anchor id=a328.7>fiórðunge; en þriú h&aolig;foð-hof í þíng-sócn hverre. Þar vóro menn <anchor id=a328.8>valðer til at geyma hofanna at vite oc réttlæte. Þeir scyldo nefna <anchor id=a328.9>dóma á þingom, oc stýra sac-ferle&mdash;því vóro þeir goðar<note place=apparatus id=an328.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> guðar, Cd.</note> callaðer. <anchor id=a328.10>Hverr maðr scylde gefa toll til hofs, sem nú til kircjo tiund.&mdash;<hi>Hawk&apos;s-bóc.</hi><ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a328.11>See p. 187, l. 3.

<p n=4><anchor id=a328.12>Þetta sumar tóc [sleit] Þórsteinn or Hafsfiarðar-ey Rauð&shy;melinga-goðorð <anchor id=a328.13>or Þórsness-þinge, þvi at hann þóttesc þar afl-vane <anchor id=a328.14>orðet hafa fyrer Snorrungom. Tóco þeir frændr þá upp þing í <anchor id=a328.15>Straums-firðe, oc héldo þat lenge síðan.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb. Saga</hi>, ch. 56.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=5><anchor id=a328.16><hi>Law-making.</hi> En með því ... þá f&oeacute;rðo lannz-stiórnar-menn l&aolig;g <anchor id=a328.17>á því, at aldrege scylde cona vesa víg-sacar-aðile, ne yngre carl-maðr <anchor id=a328.18>an sextán vetra; oc hefer þat haldesc iamnan síðan.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb. <anchor id=a328.19>Saga</hi>, ch. 38.

<p n=6><anchor id=a328.20>[&dagger; Þá sagðe l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr, at enge scylde lengr í sekð vera an<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a328.21>xx vetr allz, þó noccorr vetr yrðe millim sekta (<hi>or</hi>, þó at hann <anchor id=a328.22>g&oelig;rðe út-legðar-verk á þeim tímom).]&mdash;<hi>Grette Saga.</hi>

<pb id=pb329 n=329><p n=7><anchor id=a329.1>[&dagger; Vas þá l&aolig;g-teket, at alla forneskio menn g&oelig;rðo þeir útlaga.]&mdash;<hi>Grette <anchor id=a329.2>Saga.</hi>

<p n=8><anchor id=a329.3>Efter þat leidde Skafte Þóroddz son í l&aolig;g Fimtar-dóm, oc allt <anchor id=a329.4>þat es upp vas talet. Efter þat gengo menn til L&aolig;gbergs: tóco <anchor id=a329.5>menn þá upp ný goðorð.&mdash;Í Norðlendinga fiórðunge vóro þesse<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a329.6>ný goðorð, Melmanna goðorð í Miðfirðe, oc Laufæsinga goðorð í <anchor id=a329.7>Eyjafirðe.&mdash;<hi>Niala</hi>, ch. 98.

<p n=9><anchor id=a329.8>[&dagger; Af því tók Eirikr iarl af allar holm-g&aolig;ngor í Noregi; hann <anchor id=a329.9>g&oelig;rðe oc útlaga alla ráns-menn oc berserke þá sem með óspekter <anchor id=a329.10>fóro.]<note place=apparatus id=an329.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Ok annan dag efter í Lögrétto vas þat í lög sett, at af skylde taka holm-göngor allar þaðan í frá: ok vas þat g&oelig;rt at ráðe allra (enna) vitrosto manna es við vóro stadder. En þar vóro aller þeir es vitraster vóro á landeno. Ok þesse hefer holm-ganga síðast framið<note n=1 id=n329.1>framin, Cd.</note> veret á Íslande es þeir Hrafn ok Gunnlaugr börðosc.&mdash;<foreign lang=en-UK><hi>Gunnl. Saga</hi>, A. B. And the next day after it was made law in the Court of Laws that henceforth wagers of battle should be done away with, and this was done by the council of all the wisest men that were present, and all the wisest men of the land were there. And this wager of battle that Raven and Gun-laug fought was the last that hath ever been in Iceland.</foreign></note>&mdash;<hi>Grette Saga.</hi><ab type=lineNum>10</ab>


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=IX id=en.ch2.1.9 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>IX.</head>

<p n=1><hi>Constitutional History.</hi> Thor-stan Ing-wolf&apos;s son was the first of men to set up a moot at Keel-ness, before All-moot was set up, by the counsel of Helge Beolan and Er-lyg of Esie-berg and other wise men. And it is hence that the hallowing of the All-moot follows this gode-hood <hi>or</hi> priest-hood. Thor-kell Moon, the Speaker of the Laws, was the son of Thor-stan Ing-wolf&apos;s son. Thor-mod was the son of Thor-kell who was the Gode <hi>or</hi> Priest of the Whole Congregation <hi>or</hi> Host when Christendom <pb id=pb328a n=328>came to Iceland. Thor-gar, the gode <hi>or</hi> priest of the Light-water-men, was Speaker of the Laws at that time.

<p n=2>So said the wise man Thor-mod, that was then Gode of the Whole Congregation when Christendom came to Iceland, that with these words and moot-marks his forbears hallowed the All-moot. [<hi>The formula is lost.</hi>]

<p n=3>Then the land was divided into Quarters, and there were to be three Moots in each Quarter, and three Head-temples in each Moot-soken. There were men chosen to keep the temples with wisdom and righteousness. They were to name the dooms at the moots and direct the case-fees <hi>or</hi> fines, wherefore they were called godes <hi>or</hi> priests. Every man had to give toll to the temple, just as tithe to a church now-a-days.&mdash;<hi>Hawk&apos;s-book.</hi>

<p n=4><hi>Secession.</hi> That summer Thor-stan of Hafs-frith-ey took the gode-hood of the Red-mell-men out of the Thors-ness-moot, because he thought that he had been worsted by the Snorrungs. He and his kinsmen took up with a moot in Stream-frith, and it lasted so for a long time.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb. Saga</hi>, ch. 56.

<p n=5>Wherefore ... then the rulers of the land made this law withal, that a woman should never be the suitor <hi>or</hi> pursuer in a case of manslaughter, nor a man younger than sixteen winters, and this hath ever since held good.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb. Saga</hi>, ch. 38.

<p n=6>[Then the Speaker of the Laws said that no man should be longer in full outlawry than twenty years in all, even though there were a break between the outlawries, or although he wrought a deed of outlawry during that time.]&mdash;<hi>Grette Saga.</hi>


<pb id=pb329a n=329><p n=7>[It was then made law that all wizards were made outlaws.]&mdash;<hi>Grette.</hi>

<p n=8>After that Shafto Thor-ordsson brought the Fifth Court into the laws and all that was told above. After that men went to the Hill of Laws; then men took up new gode-hoods. In the North-landers&apos; Quarter were these new gode-hoods&mdash;the Mel-men&apos;s gode-hood in Mid-frith and the Laufas-men&apos;s gode-hood in Ey-frith.&mdash;<hi>Niala.</hi>

<p n=9>[Wherefore earl Eiric did away with all wagers of battle in Norway; moreover he made all robbers and bear-sarks, that went about with riots <hi>or</hi> breach of peace, outlaws.]&mdash;<hi>Grette.</hi>


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=X id=ch2.1.10 lang=is rend="align-with(en.ch2.1.10)">
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>X.</ab> <hi>Early Christian Custom.</hi></head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a329.11>Þvi at þat vas þá micell siðr bæðe með caup-m&aolig;nnom, oc þeim <anchor id=a329.12>es á mála gengo með Cristnom m&aolig;nnom: þvi at þeir menn er <anchor id=a329.13>prim-signaðer vóro, h&aolig;fðu allt sam-neyte við Cristna menn oc svá <anchor id=a329.14>heiðna, en h&aolig;fðo þat at átrúnaðe, es þeim vas scap-felldaz.&mdash;<hi>Egil&apos;s <anchor id=a329.15>Saga</hi>, ch. 50.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=2><anchor id=a329.16>Hvatte menn þat mioc til circjo-gerðar at þat vas fyrir-heit <anchor id=a329.17>cenne-manna, at maðr scylde iam-m&aolig;rgom m&aolig;nnom eiga heimolt <anchor id=a329.18>rúm í himin-ríce sem standa mætte í circjo þeirre es hann léte <anchor id=a329.19>g&oelig;ra.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb. Saga</hi>, ch. 49.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 n=X id=en.ch2.1.10 lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head>X.</head>

<p n=1><hi>Prime-signing.</hi> Because it was then much the way there both with merchants, and them that took service with Christian men, because those men that were prime-signed [marked with the cross] could have full intercourse with Christian men, and also with heathen, and they could hold to the creed which was to their mind.&mdash;<hi>Egil&apos;s Saga</hi>, ch. 50.

<p n=2><hi>Church-building.</hi> This made men very eager in church-building, which was promised by the clergy, that a man should have room in the kingdom of heaven for as many men as could stand in the church that he had built.&mdash;<hi>Eyrb. Saga</hi>, ch. 49.


<!-- END OF TRANSLATED TEXT -->

</div2>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<div2>

<pb id=pb330 n=330><p>[In lieu of the ancient &lsquo;fencing&rsquo; of the All-moot which is lost (see p. 328), we give the one in use in the 16th century, from a 16th-century vellum.]


<p><hi>To open or set-up the All-moot at Ax-water-moot.</hi>

<p>The peace and blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us Law-moot-men all now and evermore.

<p>I, N. N.&apos;s son, Law-man, N. and N. in Iceland, set up here to-day the General <hi>or</hi> All-men&apos;s Ax-water-moot, with all right and rent, way and worship, that a lawful Law-moot ought to have according to law.

<p>I set up here both grith and full frith all men between, both without this Law-court and within.

<p>I forbid every man to waken battle <hi>or</hi> debate.

<p>And if any one break this grith, and slay a man, or deal a disabling wound, he shall forfeit fee and frith, land and chattels, and never come back to the country.

<p>And if a man shall commit any assault <hi>or</hi> insult upon another, by his wish <hi>or</hi> will [i. e. maliciously], <hi>or</hi> aim and intent, their right <hi>or</hi> fine is made greater by half, i. e. doubled, and thirteen marks to the king.

<p>No man shall take either weapon <hi>or</hi> drink to the Law-court, and if it be taken thither it shall be taken away, half the weapon and half the outlawry fine; and half to the men of the Moot, but the Moot-men shall have all the drink. And if any one fall into meat <hi>or</hi> drink, and busy himself with that rather than the Moot, he shall not have furtherance of his suit the day that he doth so whatsoever case he hath on hand at Ax-water-moot.

<p>All those stewards <hi>or</hi> bailiffs and Law-court-men that have not heretofore taken their Law-court oaths shall now take their oaths before they go into the Law-court according to the form of oaths which the Law-book giveth, and none of those men that are not named to the Law-court shall sit within the hallowing bands <hi>or</hi> bar without leave.

<p>And I forbid all and every man that is without the Law-court to make any brawling <hi>or</hi> babbling so that the Law-court-men may not go on with their judgments <hi>or</hi> plead their cases, as they have gotten lawful leave to do, for inasmuch as in all places it behoveth men to observe a quiet and seemly behaviour, so most especially in those places that are set apart for quiet and seemly behaviour, and to that end first established, and wherein there may be done most harm to many men if they be not observed in any point.

<p>The Moot ought to stand as long as the Law-man will, and as he think fit by reason of the suits and the agreement of the Law-court-men; wherefore all those men that are named to the Law-court shall sit here as it is now said, save they go away for instant needs.

<p>And whenever men shall be fined at Ax-water-moot, the king hath half the fee and the Law-man with the Law-court-men half, save thane-gild and a thirteen mark case or more which the king hath.

<p>Let men sit at the Moot with quiet and seemly behaviour, and let no man go away till the Moot is closed.

<p>Let us now hold this Moot and all others so that it be to the praise and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ and our lord the King of Norway&apos;s crown, and to the way and worship of his governors both clerk and lay, and to the honour of ourselves that are now come together here, and to the peace and profit, fruit and freedom of the land and commonalty, and of our heirs and aftercomers, and for an everlasting example in all good things.

<pb id=pb331 n=331><p>Grant this God, Father and Son and Holy Ghost, one God, King of all kings, that liveth and reigneth and governeth all worlds now and ever. Amen.


<p><hi>To close the All-moot.</hi>

<p>God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, thank and reward all those men that have sought and set this Moot with frith and freedom, with grave and good counsel, on God&apos;s behalf and men&apos;s. And now the Moot is over and ended, and with this closure every man may take his leave wheresoever it please him best.

<p>And all the men that are on the Ax-water-moot way shall be in grith towards every other man till they come home to their homestead, going along the right Moot-men&apos;s ways.

<p>And if any break this grith, slay a man <hi>or</hi> deal a disabling wound, he shall forfeit fee and frith, land and chattel, and never come back again to the country.

<p>And the sheriffs shall hold Moot at leets when they come home from Ax-water-moot, and proclaim there all the proclamation which they ought by law to proclaim.

<p>And I proclaim here to all good men that we shall hold our Law-moot here at Ax-water-moot at the right Moot-stead every twelvemonth, and come here on Peter&apos;s mass eve. Here we shall all meet without lawful hindrance, that are named for the Moot; and the Steward and his lawful deputy shall have named before Easter so many men out of each Moot as the Law-book declareth, or be fined twelve ounces for each that shall be unnamed or wrongly named.

<p>Now may all those men that have sought to this Moot the law to fulfil, the right to uphold, have for their <hi>pains in</hi> hither coming God&apos;s grace and good men&apos;s thanks, and depart in peace!&mdash;<hi>Safn til Sogu Islandz</hi>, II. 184&ndash;186.

<p><hi>Of Heritage-taking.</hi>


<!-- TODO: parenthesis before list -->
<list>
    <item>The son ought to take the heritage after his father and mother, freeborn and
heritable.
    <item>Then shall the daughter born clean-born [born in wedlock] [take] the heritage,
    <item>Then the father,
    <item>Then the brother by the same father,
    <item>Then the mother,
    <item>Then the sister by the same father,
    <item>Then the brother by the same mother,
    <item>Then the sister by the same mother.
</list>


<!-- TODO: parenthesis before list -->
<list>
    <item>Then the bastard son,
    <item>Then the bastard daughter,
    <item>Then the bastard brother by the same father,
    <item>Then the bastard sister by the same father,
    <item>Then the bastard brother by the same mother,
    <item>Then the bastard sister by the same mother.
</list>

<list>
    <item>These are the next men to the heritage freeborn&mdash;
    <list>
        <item>Father&apos;s father and mother&apos;s father.
        <item>Son&apos;s son and daughter&apos;s son.
    </list>
</list>

<list>
    <item>Next to these ought to take&mdash;
    <list>
        <item>Father&apos;s mother and mother&apos;s mother.
        <item>Son&apos;s daughter and daughter&apos;s daughter.
    </list>
</list>

<pb id=pb332 n=332><list>
    <item>Then ought to take&mdash;
    <list>
        <item>Father&apos;s brother and mother&apos;s brother.
        <item>Brother&apos;s son and sister&apos;s son.
    </list>
</list>

<list>
    <item>Afterward these ought to take&mdash;
    <list>
        <item>Father&apos;s sister and mother&apos;s sister.
        <item>Brother&apos;s daughter and sister&apos;s daughter.   [See <hi>Inheritance Law</hi>, p. 333.]
    </list>
</list>


<p>Thenceforward the nearest descendant, freeborn and heritable, is the one to take the heritage.

<p>No heritage shall any bastard take farther than after his father and mother and sister and brother.

<p>A bastard son hath the suit for his father&apos;s daughter.

<p>If a man be as near as a woman the man shall take all; if women be nearest then the heritage is parted among them. Not all men are heritable though they be freeborn.

<p>That man is not heritable whose mother was not bought with a mund of a mark or more money, or that had no bridal made for her, or that was not handfasted.

<p>A woman is bought with a <hi rend=sc>mund</hi> when a mark of six-ell-ounces is paid for her mund or handselled, or else a greater fee.

<p>A bridal is lawful made if the lawful guardian handfast the woman and there be six men at the bridal at the least, and the bridegroom goeth with light in the same bed with the woman.

<p>That child whose mother is bought with a mund is heritable if he come living into the light, and meat once into his mouth.

<p>The man is not heritable that knoweth not whether the deep saddle shall be turned backward or forward on the horse or how it shall be turned, but if he have more understanding than that he shall have his share of the heritage.

<p><hi>Of heritable men.</hi> If a man die and he have a child in hope, the child is not heritable save he come living into the light and meat come into his mouth.

<p>The man is not heritable that a thrall has got upon a freewoman.

<p>[<hi>Here follow the clauses on</hi> hrísung, hornung, bæsing, varg-drope; see p. 323.]

<p>The man is not heritable that is born in beggary.

<p><hi>Of freed folk&apos;s heritage.</hi> A man ought to take after his freedman or freedwoman, save they have born to them a son or daughter. If they be dear-born [wedlock-born], then the son ought to take; and if there be no son, then the daughter shall take. But if they die childless, then the property ought to go back as free-gift.

<p><hi>Of aliens&apos; heritage.</hi> If a man die out here and hath no kin here in the country, then his fellow [partner] ought to take the heritage....

<p>But if he have no fellow, then his messmates shall take; and if his messmates be more than one, then he shall take that hath most often ate meat with him....

<p>And if he were alone in his mess, then the skipper shall take. And if the skippers be more than one, then they shall take according as they own shares in the ship....

<p>If later come out heirs that be of the Danish tongue, they ought to take heritage and amends if they be.

<p>And he ought to use to take the heritage after outlawed men here and kinless men, that ought to have the weregild after them if they were slain<corr>.</corr>

<pb id=pb333 n=333><p>Northern-men and Danish and Swedish ought to take heritage here after their kinsmen to their third cousins and nearer....

<p><hi>Of partnership or fellowship.</hi> If a man make a partner <hi>or</hi> fellow with him here in the land and go abroad and die elsewhere, then he shall not break up the partnership before he hath found the heir.&mdash;<hi>Arfa tháttr. Cod. Reg.</hi> i. 218 sqq.


<figure id=p0333-1 rend="image(images/p0333-1.png)">
<head><hi>Weregild Law.</hi>                     Bauga-tal.</head>

<!--

          /================================\
         /                                  \
        /     /========================\     \
       /     /                          \     \
      /     /       /==ff====-mf==\      \     \
      |     |      /               \     |     |
      |     fb    /     /==f==\     |    mb    |
     fss    |     |    /       \    |    |     mbs
      |     |     |    b   V   |    |    |     |
     fbs    |     |    \       /    |    |     fss
      |     bs    \     \==s==/     /    ss    |
      |     |      \               /     |     |
      \     \       \==ss====-ds==/      /     /
       \     \                          /     /
        \     \========================/     /
         \                                  /
          \================================/
-->

</figure>


<p><hi>Inheritance Law</hi>.

<list>
    <item>2nd cousins.
    <item>3rd cousins.
    <item>4th cousins.
</list>

<figure id=p0333-2 rend="image(images/p0333-2.png)">

<!--
                          15     17     15     17
                         f.f.===f.m.   m.f.===m.m.
                              |             |
   ============================-          ============================-
   |          |                |          |                |          |
f.b. 19    f.s. 21    s.m.===f. 3   ===  m. 5===s.f.    m.b. 19    m.s. 21
                           |   |     |    |   |
    ========================   |     |    |   ========================
    |                          |     |    |                          |
    |               ============     |    ============               |
    |               |                |               |               |
 ========       ==========           |           ==========       ========
 |      |       |        |           |           |        |       |      |
g.b.   g.s.   g.b.b.   g.b.s.   c.==-H.===w.   u.b.b.   u.b.s.   u.b.   u.s.
 4      6       11       12        |    |        13       14      7      8
 |      |                          |    |                         |      |
 |      ==============-            |    |        ==================      |
 |             |      |            |    |        |       |               |
 |========     |      |      ======|    |====    |       |       ========|
 |       |     |      |      |     |    |   |    |       |       |       |
20    g.s.d.   20   g.s.d.  b.s.  b.d.  s.  d.   20      22      20      22
b.s.    22    s.s.    22     9     10   1   2   u.b.s.  u.b.d.  u.s.s.  u.s.d.
                                        |   |
                              ==========-   ==========-
                              |       |       |       |
                             s.s.    s.d.    d.s.    d.d.
                              16      18      16      18
-->

</figure>




<pb id=pb334 n=334>
<div1 id=s2.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 3.</ab> EARLY CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ICELAND.</head>


<p>We trust that the whole subject of the Law and Custom of Iceland may be treated some day by Mr. Councillor Finsen, of the Supreme Court, Copenhagen, who has given such careful and scholarly editions of its texts. We here print in due order the documents upon which our knowledge of the rise of the Commonwealth and its Law depends, as gleaned from the law-books and scrolls of the Classic period [1100&ndash;1200]. It is no great mass, but its value is high. It supplements Are&apos;s work, and supplies the legal background against which the feuds and alliances of the great families vividly stand out in the old histories of the early days of this northern Teutonic state.

<p>Our authority is an MS. codex regius 1157 of the so-called Grá-gás <hi>or</hi> Grey-Goose, a compilation the last novella of which, that on Forbidden Degrees, dates from 1217, the MS. itself not being later than c. 1230. It was edited by Finsen, 1850 sqq.

<p>The second vellum of Icelandic Law is well-nigh half a century younger, and compiled at a time when the old constitution was essentially destroyed, c. 1272; hence it omits all the constitutional and historical sections, which the earlier MS. contained.

<p>Judging from the care of its writing and the beauty of its vellum, the codex regius was written for some rich Icelandic chief, whom for reasons noticed in p. 284 we believe to have lived in the northern diocese.

<p>It is a corpus juris made up from the different separate <hi>scrolls or tractates</hi> then current, in which the several sections of the law were dealt with. These scrolls, as it is recorded, differed among themselves, and their distinctive authorities had to be settled when these private compilations, originally made by great lawyers for their own use, became the authorities and text-books for later generations.

<p>The pieces here printed, and for the first time Englished, are&mdash;

<list>
    <item><foreign lang=is>Log-rétlo Þóttr</foreign>, <hi>or</hi> the Title dealing with the Courts of Law. Ed. i. p. 211.
    <item><foreign lang=is>Log-sögu-manz Þóttr</foreign>, <hi>or</hi> the Title dealing with the Law-speaker. Ed. i. p. 208.
    <item><foreign lang=is>Þing-scapa Þóttr</foreign>, <hi>or</hi> the Title dealing with Moot-setting. Ed. i. p. 38 sqq.
</list>

<p>Of this last only the older customs and laws are here given.

<p>Since the writing of the note on the position of the Hill of Laws at the All-moot, given in Sturlunga, vol. ii. 505 ff., and touched on in the Corpus Poet. Bor. vol. ii. p. 496 n., the Editor has visited the Tinwald in the Isle of Man, and an examination of the position of the Law Hill and Court there, right <hi>east</hi> and <hi>west</hi>, has enabled him to understand more clearly the exact position of the Law Hill and the Court of Laws at the All-moot. In the Sturlunga Note it was proved that the Hill of Laws was on the brink of the Great Rift, and that the Court of Laws was near it <pb id=pb335 n=335>to the east. This all stands good, but a fresh examination of the evidence modifies the position of the Hill of Laws on the All-men&apos;s Rift, and fixes what was only guessed at before, and is wrongly given on the little map to the Sturlunga Note&mdash;the position of the Court of Laws, and the Law Rock or Hill.

<p>In the Isle of Man, as in any ancient Norse Moot-place, three things are to be noticed: a <hi>plain</hi> [voll], whereon there were to be found the <hi>hillock brink</hi> or <hi>mound</hi>, and <hi>the court</hi>. The court is <hi>due west</hi> of the hill. The procession on the 24th of June [5 July N.S.] proceeds from the court to the mound. The king, seated on the hill, had to turn his &lsquo;visage unto the east.&rsquo; The Manx Tinwald and the Icel. All-moot correspond in each particular point&mdash;

<p>The Tin-<hi>wald</hi> answers to the Icel. Þing-<hi>voll-r</hi>; the Tinwald-<hi>hill</hi> to the Icel. <hi>Log-berg</hi>, or <hi>Thing-brecca</hi>; the <hi>House of Keys</hi> to the Icel. <hi lang=is>Logrétta</hi>; the <hi>chapel</hi> to the <hi>temple</hi> of heathen days.

<p>The 24th June <hi>procession</hi> answers to the Icel. <hi>Logbergis-ganga</hi>, or dóma-út-færsla on the first Saturday of every session, the distance between hill and court being about 140 yards in each case.

<p>The <hi>path</hi>, being fenced in like the court and hill, and used for this solemn procession when the judges and officers go to and fro between them, would answer to the Icel. &lsquo;<foreign lang=is>Þingvallar-traðer</foreign>,&rsquo; mentioned in the &lsquo;Booth-Catastasis,&rsquo; or description of year 1700.

<p>The Isle of Man Deemsters (dóm-stiórar, deem-steerers) answer to the Icelandic Law-man or Law-speaker. There were two Deemsters in the Isle of Man, because its central Tinwald is a union of <hi>two older</hi> separate Tinwalds, each of which kept its Law-speaker, when the two were united in one central Moot. The Keys answer to the bench of godes, being two benches of twelve godes, just as in Iceland there were four benches of each twelve <hi>godes</hi>.

<p>The Manx Tinwald is a guide to us, inasmuch as that now, wherever we are able to fix on either hill or court on a moot-field, the other is to be found due east or west, as the case may be. In Iceland, after the union with Norway, at the end of the 13th century, every notion of the Hill of Laws (the most important item in the moot system) was obliterated or confused, and Court and Hill are mixed up hopelessly together as if it were the same thing. Tradition has died out, and a bastard tradition, manufactured by modern antiquaries, has arisen in its stead. Besides this, physical changes have taken place<corr>.</corr> The river has altered its course, and the site of the &lsquo;holm&rsquo; <hi>or</hi> islet (Ax-water-holm) is no longer the same (nor perhaps even was so in 1563) as in the days of the Commonwealth. The soil is volcanic, and several earthquakes have taken place, some chronicled (as that of 1789), others not.

<p>The Icelandic Court of Laws was to be moved by Royal leave in 1563, and was actually moved in 1579 from the old site, and taken to the spot beneath Hlad-booth, where it is figured in the woodcut to the Sturlunga Note, the reason being that the river Ax was encroaching upon the old site. The King&apos;s Letter and the statement in the tractate &lsquo;Booth-Catastasis&rsquo; <pb id=pb336 n=336>of 1700 are our authorities. The latter says that the old site was &lsquo;on the holm&rsquo; near where the lieutenant-governor&apos;s booth used to stand. Now the governor&apos;s booth was near the bishop&apos;s, the bishop&apos;s was near the church of Tingwald<note n=1 id=n336.1>Biskups Ogmundar búð (bp. of Scalholt 1522&ndash;40) vestan til við Þingvalla-traðer, á h&oelig;gre hond á túninu þá heim að kirkjunni er riðið.&mdash;<hi>Catastasis.</hi></note>. And hard by the church is the little mound called <hi>Clock-hillock</hi>, where, we take it, the great bell, presented to the Icelanders by King Harold Sigurdsson, and used for the summons of the courts, and for no other purpose<note n=2 id=n336.2>Cp. the old Frostathing-law:&mdash;&lsquo;But the priest that is to read over the book, he shall ring the big bell whenever he wants to go to the Moot; which bell must not be used on any other occasion during the session.&rsquo;</note>, was hung. Near it therefore the old Court of Laws must have been, on the elbow round which the Ax winds in fact. Thence to the west over the bridge ran the path straight up to the brink of the rift. To the north of it was the Eyre, which probably represents all that is left of the holm, where the wagers of battle were fought, and the Eyre whereon, about 1541, the 180 men of Are the Lawman stood in array to overawe the Court of Laws below them.

<p>Now adding to what is recorded the example of the Manx Tinwald, one sees that the Rock of Laws must have been a spot on the <hi>east brink</hi> of the Great Rift due <hi>west</hi> of the Court of Laws. The exact spot could probably be fixed by an accurate survey on a fairly large scale.

<p>The notices about the position of the sun are two: the one, giving the position as above the Tingwald (which we take to mean the Tingwald <hi>kirk</hi> or homestead), denotes the <hi>eastern</hi> position of the sun, marking the <hi>beginning</hi> of the working day, when the Court was sat. The other marks a <hi>western</hi> position, a westering sun on a crag called &lsquo;Hamarr,&rsquo; on the upper wall of the All-men&apos;s-cleft: which crag we would identify as the one now called Mideve-peak. Both positions were taken from the Law-hill, the central point of every old Teutonic moot-place.

<p>The Court of Laws was to meet when the sun was on Tingwald (the singular is always used in the old times down to 1600, &lsquo;á Þingvelle,&rsquo; not &lsquo;á Þing-vollom&rsquo;), that is, when the sun stands over Tingwald homestead. This would be about 9 a.m., when the sun is due east from the Law-man&apos;s seat at the Hill of Laws looking east. The Court was to close when, from the Law-man&apos;s seat, looking west to the west cliff of the ravine, the sun stood above a jutting rock or crag conspicuous therefrom about 5 p.m. on the Moot-days. The former interpretations of the passages, which, plainly read, yield these statements, commit their believers to the absurdity of imagining that the Court of Laws opened about 2.40 a.m. and closed five minutes after.

<p>The Norse Frostathing-law orders men to come to the Moot when the sun is in the east, and remain there till the nones [p.m.]. The sun &lsquo;in the east&rsquo; here answers to the &lsquo;sun on Tingwald&rsquo; in the Icel. All-moot, and the &lsquo;nones&rsquo; to &lsquo;sól á giá-hamre.&rsquo;

<p>In Iceland the godes had to put in an appearance on Thursday a.m. ere the sun had left the east, and was not yet off Tingwald homestead. In the <pb id=pb337 n=337>Norse Gulathing-law &lsquo;whilst the sun is in the sky&rsquo; is the hour (at upp-vesande sólo).

<p>We do not know, having no evidence, where the Quarter-courts were held, probably somewhere hard by the Court of Laws.

<p>One can only guess at the way in which the Hill of Laws was set by the example of the Manx Tinwald hill. The Law-man&apos;s seat is mentioned in the Icelandic authorities.

<p>The Hill and the Temple were the two holy spots, not the Court. The king sat on the hill, not in the court. Even at the present day the Manx look on the Tinwald hill as their hill of liberty, and rightly so. Antiquaries wanting to dig into the mound are warned off as right-minded Englishmen would forbid digging into Shakespear&apos;s grave. In days of old Hill and Court were, as it were, twins. Discussions, enactments of laws and decisions of law points took place in the Court, but anything partaking of proclamation, declaration, publication was done from the Hill. It was the people&apos;s place, hence the name &lsquo;All-men&apos;s cleft&rsquo; at the All-moot in Iceland. One must try to realise how, during session, intercourse between the two must have played like a weaver&apos;s shuttle to and fro, men incessantly passing from one place to another by the <hi>fenced path</hi>. In Iceland summons and challenge of jurors took place on the Law-rock. The word &lsquo;hamar-scard,&rsquo; <hi>cliff-edge</hi>, might and ought long ago to have put the learned on the track of the true site of the Hill.

<p>The arrangement of the Isle of Man Tinwald and the Icelandic All-moot is one that no doubt obtained in other Teutonic nations, the <hi>Hill</hi> for proclamations standing due west of the <hi>Law-court</hi>. This Court in early days was no doubt held within the temenos of a temple (the Keys still sit in the southern transept of the Chapel of S. John). It is not by accident that court and church are so close at Tingwald in Iceland. At the older Keel-ness-moot too the temple with its pit for executions was at the moot-stead.


<p><figure id=p337 rend="image(images/p0337.png) float(left)">
<head>Court of Laws.</head>
</figure>

<p><table rend="font-size(smaller)">
<column rend="align(right)">
<column>

<row><cell><hi>g.</hi>      <cell>Gangway.
<row><cell><hi>H.</hi>      <cell>Bishop of Holar.
<row><cell><hi>S.</hi>      <cell>Bishop of Scalholt.
<row><cell><hi>L.</hi>      <cell>Law-speaker.
<row><cell><hi>12 G.</hi>   <cell>The middle bench with the Twelves of Godes.
<row><cell><hi>12 A.</hi>   <cell>The outer and inner benches with the Twelves of Assessors.
<row><cell><hi>P. D.</hi>   <cell>Pursuer and Defendant.
</table>


<p>In 1691 the Court of Laws was for the first time held <hi>under a roof</hi> instead of in the open air.&mdash;Safn ii. 139.

<p>The sketch-map given on p. <ref target=p338 type=pageref>338</ref> will show what we take to have been the primitive arrangement of that famous moot-stead, the Icelandic Al-thing in the old days.


<pb id=pb338 n=338><p><figure id=p338 rend="image(images/p0338.png)">
<head><hi rend=sc>The Great Moot, or Al-thing,</hi> <hi>in The Old Days Before 1230.</hi></head>

<p>In technical language the Law-court when &lsquo;set&rsquo; proceeds to &lsquo;fare <hi>out</hi>&rsquo; or &lsquo;go forth,&rsquo; a phrase showing that the body started from some enclosed place&mdash;temenos or temple, after a sacrifice had been performed. In Are&apos;s days we believe the court still &lsquo;fared out&rsquo; of the churchyard after hearing mass. When Thorkell was Law-speaker there must have been a heathen temple at the Moot (possibly on the spot where the church afterwards stood), though there is no record of it, save it be in Libellus 2. 3, as emended. </figure>


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb339 n=339>
<div2 id=lawcourt lang=is rend="align-with(en.lawcourt)">
<head><hi rend=sc><corr sic="Logrétto">L&aolig;grétto</corr> Þóttr.</hi></head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a339.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> L&aolig;grétto scolo ver oc eiga oc hafa her hvert sumar á Alþinge, <anchor id=a339.2>oc scal hon sitja í þeim stað ofallt sem lenge hefer veret.

<p n=2><anchor id=a339.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þar scolo pallar þrír vesa umb-hverfiss l&aolig;gréttona svá víðer, <anchor id=a339.4>at rúmlega mege sitja á hverjom þeirra fernar tylfter manna.

<p><anchor id=a339.5>Þat ero tolf menn or fiórðunge hverjom es l&aolig;grétto-seto eigo, oc<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a339.6>L&aolig;gsogo-maðr umb framm, svá at þar scolo ráða l&aolig;gom oc lofom: <anchor id=a339.7>þeir scolo aller sitja á mið-palle, oc þar eigo byscopar órer rúm.

<p n=3><anchor id=a339.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þeir menn tolf eigo l&aolig;grétto-seto or Norðlendinga fiórðunge, <anchor id=a339.9>es fara með goðorð þau tolf, es þar vóro þá h&aolig;fð es þeir &aoacute;tto þing <anchor id=a339.10>fiogor, en goðar þrír í hverjo þinge.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=4><anchor id=a339.11><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En í &aolig;llom fiórðungom &aolig;ðrom, þá eigo menn þeir nio l&aolig;grétto-seto <anchor id=a339.12>or fiórðunge hverjom, es fara með goðorð full oc forn, <anchor id=a339.13>þau es þá vóro þriú í vár-þinge hverjo, es þing vóro þriú í fiórðunge <anchor id=a339.14>hverjom, þeirra þriggja: enda scolo þeir aller hafa með ser <anchor id=a339.15>mann einn or þinge hverjo eno forna, svá at þó eignesc tolf menn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a339.16>l&aolig;grétto-seto or fiórðunge hverjom: en forn goðorð Norðlendinga <anchor id=a339.17>&aolig;ll ero fiórðunge scerð at Alþingis-nefno við full goðorð &aolig;nnor <anchor id=a339.18>á lande her.

<p n=5><anchor id=a339.19><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þat es oc um þá menn alla es svá eigo l&aolig;grétto seto sem nú <anchor id=a339.20>vas tínt, at þeirra hverr á at scipa tveim m&aolig;nnom í l&aolig;grétto til<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a339.21>umb-ráða með ser, &aolig;ðrom fyrer ser, en &aolig;ðrom á bac ser, oc sínom <anchor id=a340.1><pb id=pb340 n=340>þing-m&aolig;nnom: þá verða pallar scipaðer til fullz oc fernar tylfter <anchor id=a340.2>manna á hverjom palle.

<p n=6><anchor id=a340.3><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Enger menn scolo sitja firer innan palla þá es l&aolig;grétta es <anchor id=a340.4>rudd, nema þeir es m&aoacute;l eigosc við; en sitja ofallt þess á miðle, oc <anchor id=a340.5>á l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr at scipa rúm þat: út frá p&aolig;llom á alþýða at sitja.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=7><anchor id=a340.6><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þeim einom m&aolig;nnom es rétt at standa upp at l&aolig;grétto, þá es <anchor id=a340.7>þar scal k&oeacute;ra l&aolig;g eða lof, es um m&aoacute;l manna scolo d&oeacute;ma, oc þeim <anchor id=a340.8>&aolig;ðrom es yzter ero þeirra es þar ero comner: útlagr es hverr <anchor id=a340.9>þrimr m&aolig;rcom es eige g&oelig;rr svá, oc á sá s&aolig;c es vill.

<p n=8><anchor id=a340.10><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En ef menn troðasc svá mioc at l&aolig;grétto fyrer &aolig;nd-cost, eða<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a340.11>g&oelig;ra þar hrang þat eða há-reyste, at fyrer því af-glapasc m&aoacute;l <anchor id=a340.12>manna; oc varðar þat fiorbaugs-garð sem &aolig;ll þings-afgl&aolig;pon.

<p n=9><anchor id=a340.13><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Ef þeir menn coma til l&aolig;grétto es þar eigo setor, en aðrer <anchor id=a340.14>hafa sezc í rúm þeirra, þá scolo þeir beiða ser rúma, oc es hinom <anchor id=a340.15>vítis-laust ef þeir ganga þá í braut. En ef þeir híra við þá es rúms<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a340.16>es beitt, oc varðar þat þriggja marca útlegð. Þá scal eigande <anchor id=a340.17>beiða seto sínnar með vátta, oc varðar þat fiorbaugs-garð ef þá es <anchor id=a340.18>varnat. Þat ero allt stefno sacar, oc scal kveðja nio heimilis-búa <anchor id=a340.19>þess er sóttr es til fiorbaugs saca, en fimm til útlegðar.

<p n=10><anchor id=a340.20><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Þat es oc, at l&aolig;grétta scal út fara Dróttins-daga báða í þinge,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a340.21>oc þinglausna-dag, oc ofallt þess í miðle es l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr vill eða <anchor id=a340.22>meire hlutr manna, oc í hvert sinn es menn vilja ryðia l&aolig;grétto.

<pb id=pb341 n=341><p n=11><anchor id=a341.1><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Þar scolo menn rétta l&aolig;g sín oc g&oelig;ra nýmæle ef vilja.

<p n=12><anchor id=a341.2><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Þar scal beiða m&aolig;nnom sycno leyfa allra, oc sátta leyfa <anchor id=a341.3>þeirra allra es einca-lofs scal at beiða, oc margra lofa annarra, svá <anchor id=a341.4>sem tínt es í l&aolig;gom.

<p n=13><anchor id=a341.5><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Þat scal allt metasc svá í l&aolig;grétto sem lofat sé es enge maðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a341.6>neiter, sá es l&aolig;grétto-seto á: enda vere enge lýrite fyrer útan l&aolig;grétto. <anchor id=a341.7>Hverr maðr þeirra es l&aolig;grétto-seto á, scal g&oelig;ra annat-tveggja <anchor id=a341.8>um leyfe hvert, at iáta eða níta: útlagr es hann ella þrimr <anchor id=a341.9>m&aolig;rcom.

<p n=14><anchor id=a341.10><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Ef menn biðja lofa í l&aolig;grétto, svá at þeir menn ero óg&oelig;rla<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a341.11>þar comner eða á braut gengner es l&aolig;grétto-seto eigo, en þó <anchor id=a341.12>ero fernar tylfter manna eða fleire, þá má l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr scipa <anchor id=a341.13>því liðe í rúm þeirra manna es setor eigo, til fullz; oc útlagasc <anchor id=a341.14>hverr es synjar þess. Nú verðr mið-pallr al-scipaðr: þá scal <anchor id=a341.15>l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr nefna ser vátta: &lsquo;Í þat vætte,&rsquo; scal hann cveða,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a341.16>&lsquo;at þesser sitja aller í l&aolig;grétto at míno ráðe, oc rétter til þess <anchor id=a341.17>at fylla l&aolig;g oc lof; nefne-ec þetta vætte at l&aolig;gom hveim es <anchor id=a341.18>nióta þarf.&rsquo; Enda scolo þá verða lof iamn-f&aolig;st þar, sem goðar <anchor id=a341.19>sæte sialfer; oc fyrir þeim einom scolo hiner upp rísa es áðr <anchor id=a341.20>s&aoacute;to.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=15><anchor id=a341.21><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Þat es oc, at þat scolo l&aolig;g vesa á lande her sem á scr&aoacute;m <anchor id=a341.22>standa. En ef scrár scilr á, oc scal þat hafa es stendr á scr&aoacute;m <anchor id=a341.23>þeim es byscopar eigo. Nú scilr enn þeirra scrár á, þá scal sú <anchor id=a341.24>hafa sítt mál, es lengra seger, þeim orðom es mále scipta með <anchor id=a342.1><pb id=pb342 n=342>m&aolig;nnom. En ef þær segja iamn-langt, oc þó sítt hvár, þá scal <anchor id=a342.2>sú hafa sítt mál es í Scála-hollte es.

<p n=16><anchor id=a342.3><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> Þat scal allt hafa es finnsc á scr&aoacute; þeirre es Hafliðe lét g&oelig;ra, <anchor id=a342.4>nema þocat sé síðan: en þat eitt af annarra l&aolig;gmanna firer-s&aolig;gn <anchor id=a342.5>es eigi mæle því í gegn: oc allt þat hafa es hitzog leifer, eða gl&oelig;g&shy;gra<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a342.6>es.

<p n=17><anchor id=a342.7><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> Nú þræta menn um l&aolig;gmál, oc má þá ryðja l&aolig;grétto til, ef <anchor id=a342.8>eige scera scrár or.

<p n=18><anchor id=a342.9><ab type=parNum>18.</ab> En svá scal at því<note place=apparatus id=an342.1><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>því]</ab> þ&apos;ri, Cd.</note> fara, at beiða með vátta goða alla at <anchor id=a342.10>L&aolig;gberge oc l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mann, at þeir gange í l&aolig;grétto oc í setor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a342.11>sínar, at greiða l&aolig;gmál þetta svá sem heðan frá scal vesa &lsquo;Beiðe ec <anchor id=a342.12>l&aolig;gbeiðing&rsquo; scal sá kveða, es reyna vill.

<p n=19><anchor id=a342.13><ab type=parNum>19.</ab> Ef noccorer þeir menn es setor eigo g&oelig;ra eige ganga í rúm <anchor id=a342.14>sín, es þeir vito at l&aolig;grétto scal ryðja, oc varðar þat fior-baugs-garð <anchor id=a342.15>sem &aolig;nnor þings-afgl&aolig;pon: enda es rétt, at telja goðann þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a342.16>hvern útlagan þrimr m&aolig;rcom oc or goðorðe síno: þat varðar oc <anchor id=a342.17>allt slíct et sama þeim m&aolig;nnom &aolig;llom es l&aolig;grétto-seto eigo, at <anchor id=a342.18>gegna at l&aolig;grétto því sem þá scylda l&aolig;g til.

<p n=20><anchor id=a342.19><ab type=parNum>20.</ab> Alengr, es goðar coma í setor sínar, þá scal hverr þeirra <anchor id=a342.20>scipa manne á pall fyrer sic, en &aolig;ðrom manne á enn yzta pall<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a342.21>a bac ser, til umbráða.

<p><anchor id=a342.22>Síðan scolo þeir menn es þar eigosc m&aoacute;l við, tína l&aolig;gmál þat es <anchor id=a342.23>þá scilr á, oc segja til þess hvat í deiler með þeim.

<pb id=pb343 n=343><p><anchor id=a343.1>Þá eigo menn síðan at meta m&aoacute;l þeirra til þess es þeir hafa ráðenn <anchor id=a343.2>hug sínn um þat mál; oc spyrja síðan alla l&aolig;grétto-menn þá es <anchor id=a343.3>á mið-palle sitja, at scýra þat, hvat hverr þeirra vill l&aolig;g um þat <anchor id=a343.4>mál. Síðan scal hverr goðe segja hvat l&aolig;gen mu<hi>n</hi><note place=apparatus id=an343.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> muno?</note> calla, oc með <anchor id=a343.5>hv&aoacute;rom hverfa at því mále, oc scal afl ráða. En ef þeir ero iam-marger<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a343.6>l&aolig;grétto-menn hvárer-tveggjo, es sítt calla l&aolig;g hvárer vesa, <anchor id=a343.7>þá scolo þeir hafa sítt mál, es l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr es í liðe með.

<p n=21><anchor id=a343.8><ab type=parNum>21.</ab> En ef aðrer ero fleire, þá scolo þeir ráða; oc scolo hvárer-tveggjo <anchor id=a343.9>vinna véfangs-eið at síno mále, oc fela under eið sínn, <anchor id=a343.10>at þeir hyggja þat vesa l&aolig;g um þat mál sem þeir fylgja at; oc<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a343.11>cveða á, af hví þat sé l&aolig;g.

<p n=22><anchor id=a343.12><ab type=parNum>22.</ab> Nú es noccorr l&aolig;grétto-maðr svá siúkr eða sárr, at sá má eige <anchor id=a343.13>úte vesa: þá scolo þeir hvárer-tveggjo s&oeacute;kja orð hans til búðar, oc <anchor id=a343.14>segja hvat í deiler með þeim; en hann scal eið vinna slícan sem <anchor id=a343.15>aðrer, oc cveða á þat með hv&aoacute;rom hann vill hverfa.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=23><anchor id=a343.16><ab type=parNum>23.</ab> En ef þá es l&aolig;grétto-maðr noccorr ó-mále eða ó-vite<note place=apparatus id=an343.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Read, &oelig;rvite.</note> eða <anchor id=a343.17>andaðr es þessa máls þarf: oc scal sá maðr í stað hans, es dóm-nefno <anchor id=a343.18>átte upp at taca ef hans være þá við misst.

<p n=24><anchor id=a343.19><ab type=parNum>24.</ab> Nú lýsa l&aolig;grétto-menn hug sínn, oc verða þeir tolf eða fleire, <anchor id=a343.20>es lið hafa minna, þá scolo þeir es fære ero saman, vinna eiða at<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a343.21>síno mále. Þá verða hiner es lið hafa meira oc scylder at vinna <anchor id=a343.22>eiða at síno mále, svá at þeir svere manne fleire eða tveimr et fæsta, <anchor id=a344.1><pb id=pb344 n=344>ef l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr es í enne minne sveit. En ef þeir metasc eiða <anchor id=a344.2>við í eno meira liðe, oc scolo þeir hluta með ser, nema þeir vile <anchor id=a344.3>aller sverja.

<p n=25><anchor id=a344.4><ab type=parNum>25.</ab> Nú verða þeir fære saman an tolf es lið hafa minna, þá ero <anchor id=a344.5>þeir þegar af síno mále; oc ero enger menn or eno meira liðe þá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a344.6>scylder at vinna eiða at móte eiðom þeirra es fære ero saman <anchor id=a344.7>an tolf.

<p n=26><anchor id=a344.8><ab type=parNum>26.</ab> Ef þeir ero noccorer l&aolig;grétto-menn es með hv&aoacute;ronge látasc <anchor id=a344.9>vesa mono, eða varna þeir annarra scila um þau m&aoacute;l: oc varðar <anchor id=a344.10>þat allt slíct sem áðr vas tínt, oc á sá þeirra sacar þær es þar eigosc<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a344.11>m&aoacute;l við, es heldr vill s&oeacute;kja til fullra laga. En ef hvárrgi vill s&oeacute;kja, <anchor id=a344.12>þá á s&aolig;c þá hvárr es vill: enda scal l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr scipa rúm þeirra <anchor id=a344.13>manna es þar g&oelig;ra enge<note place=apparatus id=an344.1><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>enge]</ab> félag, Cd.; but since underlined.</note> l&aolig;g-scil firer sec; oc taca mann or vár-þinge <anchor id=a344.14>því es gl&aolig;pen c&oelig;mr, ef þat má: enda varðar þá hverjom <anchor id=a344.15>fiorbaugs-garð es synjar þess. En ef l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr cann þar eige<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a344.16>menn firer í þá sveit, þá scal hann beiða samþingis-goða þess es <anchor id=a344.17>scila varnar, at þeir fáe hónom mann í stað, svá at þá mege í <anchor id=a344.18>því fylla l&aolig;grétto: oc varðar þá slíct þeim es þess synjar sem <anchor id=a344.19>hinom es gl&aolig;p g&oelig;rðe.

<p n=27><anchor id=a344.20><ab type=parNum>27.</ab> Nú vill enge sam-þingis-goðanna scil g&oelig;ra, þá scal beiða<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a344.21>manna í annat þing, oc í et þriðja, ef eige fæzc áðr: enda eigo þá <anchor id=a344.22>iam-micit þeirra orð at standasc sem annarra l&aolig;grétto-manna.

<p n=28><anchor id=a344.23><ab type=parNum>28.</ab> Þat es oc, at (einn)<note place=apparatus id=an344.2><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>einn]</ab> add. by conj.</note> hverr maðr scal tína við vátta, l&aolig;gmál þat <anchor id=a345.1><pb id=pb345 n=345>es afl fæsc til, en aller scolo sam-cvæðe gialda á: síðan scal <anchor id=a345.2>upp segja at L&aolig;gberge.

<p n=29><anchor id=a345.3><ab type=parNum>29.</ab> Þat es oc scyllt þeim m&aolig;nnom &aolig;llom es l&aolig;grétto-seto eigo, <anchor id=a345.4>at fylla upp-s&aolig;go ofallt, es l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr vill l&aolig;g upp segja, hvárt <anchor id=a345.5>sem þat es at L&aolig;gberge, eða í l&aolig;grétto; oc þótt í kirkjo sé, ef veðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a345.6>es ó-svást úte.

<p n=30><anchor id=a345.7><ab type=parNum>30.</ab> En ef noccorer l&aolig;grétto-menn hafa eige tom til þess, þá <anchor id=a345.8>scolo þeir menn tveir heyra á upp-s&aolig;go fyrir hvern þeirra, es til þess <anchor id=a345.9>ero tecner af þeim, at sitja á p&aolig;llom í l&aolig;grétto.

<p n=31><anchor id=a345.10><ab type=parNum>31.</ab> Nú es at hv&aoacute;rego gaumr gefenn, þá mego ecke standasc<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a345.11>þeirra l&aolig;grétto-manna orð, es svá scipa, á sama sumre.

<p n=32><anchor id=a345.12><ab type=parNum>32.</ab> Þar es um þat l&aolig;gmál es þrætt es þá vas upp sagt, enda <anchor id=a345.13>varðar þriggja marca útlegð, oc eigo aðrer l&aolig;grétto-menn s&aolig;c þá, <anchor id=a345.14>oc scal stefna at L&aolig;gberge, oc kveðja til heimilis-búa fimm þess es <anchor id=a345.15>sóttr es.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=33><anchor id=a345.16><ab type=parNum>33.</ab> En l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr á at scipa l&aolig;gberg, oc út-lagasc þeir <anchor id=a345.17>þrimr m&aolig;rcom es at ólofe hans sitja þar.

<p n=34><anchor id=a345.18><ab type=parNum>34.</ab> Nú bióða menn þau óscil l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-manne, at láta hann eige <anchor id=a345.19>ná seto sínne, eða þá menn es hann hefer ein-nefnda til þess at <anchor id=a345.20>sitja at L&aolig;gberge; oc varðar þat fiorbaugs-garð, oc scal þat s&oeacute;kja<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a345.21>sem aðra þings-afgl&aolig;pon.

<p n=35><anchor id=a345.22><ab type=parNum>35.</ab> Þess er l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr scyldr, at segja &aolig;llom, þeim es hann <anchor id=a346.1><pb id=pb346 n=346>spyrja<note place=apparatus id=an346.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> spyrja her, Cd.</note>, l&aolig;gmál bæðe her oc heima: enda<note place=apparatus id=an346.2>enda] enn, Cd.</note> es-at hann framarr <anchor id=a346.2>scyldr sac-ráða við menn.

<p n=36><anchor id=a346.3><ab type=parNum>36.</ab> Hann scal oc upp segja þing-sc&aolig;p hvert sumar, oc aðra <anchor id=a346.4>þ&aoacute;tto alla, svá at þeir verðe upp sagðer á þrimr sumrom hverjom, <anchor id=a346.5>ef meire hlutr manna vill hlýtt hafa.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=37><anchor id=a346.6><ab type=parNum>37.</ab> F&aolig;sto-dag enn fyrra í þinge scal þing-sc&aolig;p ofallt upp segja, <anchor id=a346.7>ef menn hafa tóm til at hlýða.

<p n=38><anchor id=a346.8><ab type=parNum>38.</ab> Þat varðar allt þriggja marca út-legð l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-manne, ef <anchor id=a346.9>hann leyser eige af hende þau scil &aolig;ll es hann es scyldr til, at <anchor id=a346.10>nauðsynja-lauso; oc á sá maðr þá út-legð halfa es s&oeacute;ker, en<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a346.11>halfa dómendr.

<p n=39><anchor id=a346.12><ab type=parNum>39.</ab> En ef l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr g&oelig;r þau ofi&aolig;t noccor, es meire hlutr <anchor id=a346.13>manna vill calla þings-afgl&aolig;pon, oc varðar hónom þat <anchor id=a346.14>fiorbaugs-garð.

<p n=40><anchor id=a346.15><ab type=parNum>40.</ab> Þat es oc, at á því eino vár-þinge á hann út-legðer, es hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a346.16>heyr sialfr.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=en.lawcourt rend="display(none)">
<head><hi>The Law-Court Section.</hi></head>


<p n=1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> A law-court shall we also have and hold every summer at the All-moot, and it shall sit ever in the place where it hath long been.

<p n=2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> There shall be three raised places <hi>or</hi> daïses about the law-court, so broad that there be room on each of them for four twelves of men.

<p>There are twelve men out of each Quarter that have seats in the law-court, and the law-speaker also, that laws and licences may be decided. They shall all sit on the mid-benches, and there also our bishops have their places.

<p n=3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Those twelve men out of the North-lander&apos;s Quarter have seats in the law-court that held the twelve gode-hoods that were held there when there were four moots there and three gode-hoods in each moot.

<p n=4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> But in all the other Quarters those nine men have seats in the law-court out of each Quarter that held the full and old gode-hoods which there were when there were three in every spring-moot, and three moots in each of these three Quarters. And they shall all have with them one man out of each of the old moots, so that there shall be twelve men with seats in the law-court out of each Quarter; but the old gode-hoods of the North-landers are all minished by a fourth at the naming to the All-moot, in comparison to the other full gode-hoods here in the land.

<p n=5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> That is also [law] as to all them that have seats in the law-court as hath now been particularly said, that each of them ought to take two men into the law-court from among his moot-men, to take counsel with <pb id=pb340a n=340>him, the one before him and the other at his back. Then the daïses are made up fully, and there be four twelves of men on each daïs.

<p n=6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> No man shall sit inside the daïses when the law-court is cleared, save they that have cases: and they shall sit even in the midst thereof, and the law-speaker shall give them place there. Outside of the daïses the people ought to sit.

<p n=7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Only those men may lawfully stand up at the law-court that are dealing with law or licence, or pleading men&apos;s cases, and they that are outside [i. e. on the back bench] of them that are come hither. Every man that doth not so shall pay the outlaw-fine of three marks, and he hath pursual that will.

<p n=8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> And if men press greatly upon the law-court on purpose, or make a riot there or a noise, so that men&apos;s speech be disturbed thereby, they shall be fined at the rate of the lesser outlawry <hi>or</hi> life-ring-garth for all disturbance of moot.

<p n=9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> If men come to the law-court that have seats there, and others have sat in their place, they shall claim their place, and the others are free of amends if they go away then. But if they loiter on in spite of him who hath claimed his seat, it is a fine of three marks. Then the owner shall claim his seat with witnesses, and a fine at the rate of the lesser outlawry <hi>or</hi> life-ring-garth, if it be refused then. These are all cases for summons [actionable], and there shall be called an inquest of nine men, neighbours of him that is sued for a case of lesser outlawry, and five for the outlaw-fine.

<p n=10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> It shall be also that the law-court shall go forth both Lord&apos;s-days in the moot, and the moot-breaking-day, and ever between these days when the law-speaker will, or the more part of men, and every time when men wish to clear the law-court.

<pb id=pb341a n=341><p n=11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> There shall men righten the laws and make novellae.

<p n=12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> There shall men pray for all licences for amendment of penalty, and accord licences for all them that shall pray for privileges, and many other licences, as is set forth particularly in the laws.

<p n=13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Every licence asked for shall be regarded as granted which no man that hath a seat in the law-court doth object to, and to which no objection is made from outside the law-court. Every man that hath a seat in the law-court shall vote on every licence yea or nay, otherwise he must pay an outlaw-fine of three marks.

<p n=14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> If men pray leave in the law-court when they be not entirely come or have gone away that have seats at the law-court, and yet there be four twelves of men or more, then the law-speaker may fill the places of those men withal until the seats be full, and he that refuseth this shall be fined. And so the mid-daïs shall be made full. Then shall the law-speaker name witnesses to himself, and by their witness he shall declare, &lsquo;All these sit in the law-court by my rede, and are entitled of right to fulfil law and licences. I name this witness ... lawfully for whomsoever may take advantage thereof.&rsquo; And then all licences shall be as good as if the godes were themselves sitting, and only for him that sat in that seat before shall any man be bound to rise.

<p n=15><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> This shall also be that the laws of the land here shall be as they stand in the scrolls, and if the scrolls differ then that shall hold that standeth in the scrolls that the bishops have. And if now these scrolls differ, then that shall carry the day that saith more fully the words that <pb id=pb342a n=342>bear upon the case; but if they speak at the same length, but each his own way, that which is in Scal-holt shall carry the case.

<p n=16><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> All that shall hold that is found in the scroll that Haf-lide had made, save there be somewhat of it repealed since; but only that of other law-men&apos;s rulings which doth not contradict it; and all that shall hold which is left out in that one, or is more clear <hi>in them</hi>.

<p n=17><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> Now if men differ on a case of law, then the law-court may be cleared upon it, if the scrolls do not settle it.

<p n=18><ab type=parNum>18.</ab> And then shall men summon with witnesses all the godes and the law-speaker to the law-hill to go to the law-court and to their seats to interpret the case of law as it shall be from henceforward. &lsquo;I bid a law-bidding,&rsquo; shall he say that will have the case tried.

<p n=19><ab type=parNum>19.</ab> If there be any men that have seats [there], and will not go to their place when they know that the law-court shall be cleared, they shall pay a life-ring-garth fine, as for other disturbance of moot; and it is right to claim of every gode an outlaw-fine of three marks, and that he go out of his gode-hood. And just the same shall all they that have seats in the law-court be bound to perform there that which they are bound to by law in the courts of law.

<p n=20><ab type=parNum>20.</ab> As soon as the godes have come into their seats each one of them shall set [one of his] men on the daïs before him, and another on the outside daïs at his back, to take counsel with them.

<p>Then shall those men that have a case set forth particularly the law case that there is a difference on, and say thereon what is at issue between them.

<pb id=pb343a n=343><p>Then afterwards men ought to plead their case till they have spoken their opinion of the matter.

<p>And afterwards they shall enquire of all the law-court-men that sit on the mid-daïs to declare what each one of them wishes to be the law in the case.

<p>Then each gode shall say what the law should declare, and with whom they will side in this case, and the more part shall have its way; but if there be as many law-court-men on each side declaring the several ways they would have the laws decide it, then they with whom the law-speaker shall side shall carry their case.

<p n=21><ab type=parNum>21.</ab> But if the other are the more part they shall have their way, and on each side they shall take an oath of impugnment, and avouch in their oath that they think that to be law in the case which they have upheld, and set forth solemnly why it is law.

<p n=22><ab type=parNum>22.</ab> Now if any law-court-man be sick or wounded so that he may not be out of doors, then shall they both seek his vote in his booth, and tell him what is the issue between them, and he shall take an oath like the rest, and set forth solemnly what side he would take.

<p n=23><ab type=parNum>23.</ab> But if any law-court-man that is needed for such a matter be speechless or witless or dead, then shall he be put in his place that ought to take up his jurisdiction if he were dead or gone.

<p n=24><ab type=parNum>24.</ab> Now the law-court-men declare their minds, and should there be twelve or more that are on the lesser side, then shall they who are the fewer take an oath concerning their case. Then shall they who have the greater side be bound also to take an oath concerning the case, so that they do swear, in a majority of one or two at least, if the law-speaker <pb id=pb344a n=344>be on the lesser company. And if there be a contention among them on the greater side, then shall they cast lots among them, save they all be willing to swear.

<p n=25><ab type=parNum>25.</ab> Now if they be less than twelve that have the lesser side, then they have forthwith lost their case: and then no men out of the greater side are bound to take an oath against the oaths of them that are fewer than twelve together.

<p n=26><ab type=parNum>26.</ab> If there be any law-court-men that will not take part with either side, or perform their other duties in the case, for any such thing they shall be fined as is set forth particularly above, and they shall have the pursual that have a case, or that would fain come to fuller law. But if neither will take action, then he hath the pursual that will, and the law-speaker shall fill the places of those men that do not do their law duties, and take men out of the Spring-moot wherein that disturber of the law come, and he shall pay the life-ring-garth fine that refuseth to do his duty. And if the law-speaker knoweth no man in that company [fit for that purpose], then he shall beg the gode of the same moot as the man that refused his duties to get him a man in his place, so that there may be a full law-court, and he that will not do this shall pay just such a fine as he that did the disturbance.

<p n=27><ab type=parNum>27.</ab> Now if no gode of the same moot will do anything, then he shall get him a man out of another moot, and in a second or third if none can be done otherwise. And they have as great a vote that stand [for others] in this way as the other law-court-men.

<p n=28><ab type=parNum>28.</ab> It shall be also that one man shall recount particularly with witnesses <pb id=pb345a n=345>the law that hath gotten the better, and all the others shall give their assent thereto. Then it shall be said over at the law-hill.

<p n=29><ab type=parNum>29.</ab> It is also the bounden duty of all men that have seats in the law-court always to fill up that which is said over, when the law-speaker says over the law, whether it be at the law-hill or in the law-court, or though it be in the church when the weather is uncomfortable out of doors.

<p n=30><ab type=parNum>30.</ab> And if certain law-court-men have not leisure for this, then shall those two men that are taken to this end by them to sit in the daïs in the law-court listen to the saying over of the law in the stead of each.

<p n=31><ab type=parNum>31.</ab> Now if neither of these give heed thereto, then shall the vote of them and the law-court-men that appointed them not stand that same summer....

<p n=32><ab type=parNum>32.</ab> When there is any contention upon some point of law that hath been said over, there is an outlaw-fine of three marks, and the other law-court-men shall have the pursual and shall summon them at the law-hill, and call on a quest of five neighbours of him that the action is against.

<p n=33><ab type=parNum>33.</ab> And the law-speaker hath to marshal men at the law-hill, and he oweth an outlaw-fine of three marks that shall sit there without his leave.

<p n=34><ab type=parNum>34.</ab> Now if men offer to disturb the law-speaker, not to let him take his seat, or them that he hath named to sit at the law-hill with him, there shall be paid the life-ring-garth fine, and the offenders shall be sued like other disturbers of moots.

<p n=35><ab type=parNum>35.</ab> The law-speaker is bound to this&mdash;to say to all them that require <pb id=pb346a n=346>of him the law case [i.e. what the law says] both here and at home, but he is not bound to mix himself up any further in men&apos;s cases.

<p n=36><ab type=parNum>36.</ab> He must also say over the Moot-making Section every summer, and all the other Sections, so that they be said over every three summers, if the greater part of the people will hearken thereto.

<p n=37><ab type=parNum>37.</ab> The first fast-day [Friday] of the Moot the whole Moot-making Section shall be all said over if men have leisure to hearken thereto.

<p n=38><ab type=parNum>38.</ab> There is an outlaw-fine of three marks for all this on the law-speaker whenever he falls short in his necessary work; and the man that pursues the suit and the dooms-men half.

<p n=39><ab type=parNum>39.</ab> But if the law-speaker acteth so unfitly that the greater part of men shall declare it to be disturbance of court, he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine.

<p n=40><ab type=parNum>40.</ab> It shall be also that he take the fines only at the spring-moot for the cases he heareth himself.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=logsogo lang=is rend="align-with(en.logsogo)">
<head><hi rend=sc><corr sic="Logsogo-mannz">L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz</corr> Þóttr.</hi></head>

<p n=1><anchor id=a346.18><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Svá es enn mælt, at sá maðr scal vesa noccor ofallt á lande <anchor id=a346.19>óro es scyldr sé til þess at segja l&aolig;g m&aolig;nnom, oc heiter sá l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr.

<p n=2><anchor id=a346.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En ef l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz misser við, þá scal or þeim fiórðunge<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a346.21>taca mann til at segja þing-sc&aolig;p upp et næsta sumar, es hann <anchor id=a346.22>hafðe síðarst heimile í.

<pb id=pb347 n=347><p><anchor id=a347.1>Menn scolo þá taca ser l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mann oc sýsla þat f&aolig;sto-dag <anchor id=a347.2>hverr vesa scal, áðr sacar sé lýstar.

<p n=3><anchor id=a347.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þat es oc vel, ef aller menn verða sátter á einn mann; en ef <anchor id=a347.4>l&aolig;grétto-maðr noccorr stendr við því es flester vilja, oc scal <anchor id=a347.5>þá hluta í hvern fiórðung l&aolig;g-saga scal hverfa. En þeir fiórðungs-menn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a347.6>es þá hefer hlutr í hag boreð, scolo taca l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mann þann <anchor id=a347.7>sem þeir verða sátter á, hvárt sem sá es or þeirra fiórðunge eða or <anchor id=a347.8>&aolig;ðrom fiórðunge noccorom þeirra manna es þeir mego þat geta at.

<p n=4><anchor id=a347.9><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Nú verða fiórðungs-menn eige á sátter, oc scal þá afl ráða <anchor id=a347.10>með þeim. En ef þeir ero iam-marger es l&aolig;grétto-seto eigo<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a347.11>es sínn l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mann vilja hvárer, þá scolo þeir ráða es byscop sá <anchor id=a347.12>fellr í fullting með es í þeim fiórðunge es. Nú ero l&aolig;grétto-menn <anchor id=a347.13>noccorer þeir es níta því es aðrer vilja, fáe enge mann sialfer <anchor id=a347.14>til l&aolig;gs&aolig;go, oc eigo enscis þeirra orð at metasc.

<p n=5><anchor id=a347.15><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mann á í l&aolig;grétto at taca þá es menn hafa ráðet<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a347.16>hverr vesa scal, oc scal einn maðr scilja fyrer, en aðrer gialda <anchor id=a347.17>sam-kvæðe á:

<p><anchor id=a347.18>Oc scal þriú sumar sam-fast enn same hafa, nema menn vile <anchor id=a347.19>eige breytt hafa.

<p n=6><anchor id=a347.20><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Or þeirre l&aolig;grétto es l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr es tecenn, scolo menn<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a347.21>ganga til L&aolig;gbergs, oc scal hann ganga til L&aolig;gbergs, oc setjasc í rúm <anchor id=a347.22>sítt, oc scipa L&aolig;gberg þeim m&aolig;nnom sem hann vill, en menn scolo <anchor id=a347.23>þá mæla m&aoacute;lom sínom.

<p n=7><anchor id=a347.24><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þat es oc mælt, at l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr es scyldr till þess at segja <anchor id=a348.1><pb id=pb348 n=348>upp L&aolig;g-þ&aoacute;tto alla á þrimr sumrom hverjom: en Þing-sc&aolig;p hvert <anchor id=a348.2>sumar.

<p n=8><anchor id=a348.3><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr á upp at segja sycno-leyfe &aolig;ll at L&aolig;gberge <anchor id=a348.4>svá at meire hlutr manna sé þar, ef því um náer, oc misseres-tal, oc <anchor id=a348.5>svá þat ef menn scolo coma fyrr til Alþingess an tio vicor ero<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a348.6>af sumre: oc tína Imbro-daga hald, oc F&aolig;sto-í-ganga: oc scal <anchor id=a348.7>hann þetta allt mæla at þing-lausnom.

<p n=9><anchor id=a348.8><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Þat es oc, at l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr scal svá gerla þ&aoacute;tto alla upp <anchor id=a348.9>segja, at enge vite einna micloge g&oelig;rr. En ef hónom vinsc eige <anchor id=a348.10>fróðleicr til þess, þá scal hann eiga stefno við fimm l&aolig;gmenn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a348.11>en næsto d&oeacute;gr áðr, eða fleire, þá es hann má hellzt geta af, áðr <anchor id=a348.12>hann sege hvern þ&aoacute;tt upp:

<p><anchor id=a348.13>Oc verðr hverr maðr útlagr þrimr m&aolig;rcom es ólofat gengr á mál <anchor id=a348.14>þeirra: oc á l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr s&aolig;c þá.

<p n=10><anchor id=a348.15><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr scal hafa hvert sumar tvau hundroð alna<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a348.16>vaðmála af l&aolig;grétto fi&aoacute;m fyrer starf sítt. Hann á oc útlegðer <anchor id=a348.17>allar halfar þær es á Alþinge ero d&oeacute;mðar her: oc scal d&oeacute;ma ein&shy;daga <anchor id=a348.18>á þeim &aolig;llom annat sumar her í buanda-kirkjo-garðe Mið&shy;vico-dag <anchor id=a348.19>í mitt þing. Útlagr es hverr maðr þrimr m&aolig;rcom es <anchor id=a348.20>fé lætr d&oeacute;ma, ef hann seger eige l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-manne til, oc svá hverer<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a348.21>dóms upp-s&aolig;go-váttar hafa veret.

<p n=11><anchor id=a348.22><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Þat es oc þá es l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr hefer haft þriú sumor l&aolig;gs&aolig;go, <anchor id=a348.23>oc scal hann þá segja upp Þing-sc&aolig;p et fiórða sumar F&aolig;sto-dag <anchor id=a348.24>enn fyrra í þinge: þá es hann oc lauss frá l&aolig;gs&aolig;go af hann vill.

<pb id=pb349 n=349><p n=12><anchor id=a349.1><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Nú vill hann hafa l&aolig;gs&aolig;go lengr, ef aðrer unna hónom, þá <anchor id=a349.2>scal enn meire hlutr l&aolig;grétto-manna ráða.

<p n=13><anchor id=a349.3><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Þat es oc, at l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr es útlagr þrimr m&aolig;rcom ef hann <anchor id=a349.4>c&oelig;mr eige til Alþingess F&aolig;sto-dag enn fyrra, áðr menn gange til <anchor id=a349.5>l&aolig;gbergs, at nauðsynja-lauso: enda eigo menn þá at taca annan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a349.6>l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mann ef vilja.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=en.logsogo rend="display(none)" lang=en-UK>
<head><hi>The Law-Speaker Section.</hi></head>

<p n=1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> It is further spoken that there shall be always in our land a certain man that shall be bound to this, to speak the law to men; and he is called the <hi rend=sc>Law-Speaker</hi>.

<p n=2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But if a law-speaker should be missing [i.e. by death or other accident], then shall a man be taken to say over the Moot-making Section the next summer out of that Quarter where he had his domicile last.

<pb id=pb347a n=347><p>Men shall take to them a law-speaker, and settle upon whom it shall be on the fast-day [Friday] before the cases are opened.

<p n=3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> It is also well if all men are agreed on one man; but if any law-court-man withstand him whom most men wish for, then shall lots be cast to see to what Quarter the law-speaking is to go. And the men of that Quarter to whom the lot has fallen shall take that law-speaker whom they be agreed on, whether he be out of that Quarter, or any one of the men of any other Quarter whom they may find to take it.

<p n=4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Now if the men of the Quarter do not all agree, then the more part shall decide with them; but if they that have seats in the law-court be in equal numbers, each side wishing to have their man as law-speaker, then they shall have their way whom the bishop of that Quarter shall agree with. Now if there be any law-court-men that withstand what the others wish, but put forth no man themselves for the law-speaking, then is their vote to be held of no account.

<p n=5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> The law-speaker must be appointed in the law-court when men have agreed upon whom he shall be, and one man shall speak the formula for the rest, and the others shall yield unanimous consent thereto; and he shall hold the same three summers running and no more, unless men will not have a change.

<p n=6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Men shall go out of the law-court to the law-hill when the law-speaker is appointed, and he shall go to the law-hill and sit in his place, and marshal the law-hill to such men as he will, and there men shall plead their cases.

<p n=7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> It is further spoken that the law-speaker is bound to this&mdash;to say <pb id=pb348a n=348>over all the Sections of the law in the course of his three summers, but the Moot-making Section every summer.

<p n=8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> The law-speaker ought to say over all the inlawries <hi>or</hi> licences at the law-hill, so that the greater part of men be there [present] if so it may be, and the reckoning of the seasons [i.e. Calendar]; and also this, whether men must come to the All-moot before ten weeks of the summer be gone; and set forth the [time for the] keeping of the Ember days, and the beginning of the fast [Lent], and all this he must speak at the breaking up of the moot.

<p n=9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> It is also [right] that the law-speaker shall say over all the Sections so thoroughly that no man may know it more thoroughly; but if he have not got the knowledge for this, then he must hold meetings with five law-men or more the next day before, of whom he may the best get the knowledge before he shall say over that particular Section.

<p>And every man must pay three marks that without leave comes into their counsel, and the law-speaker shall have the soc [right of pursual].

<p n=10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> The law-speaker shall have every summer 200 ells of wadmal out of the law-court money for his trouble. He hath also the half of all the fines that are adjudged at the All-moot; and the set pay-day for all [fines] shall be the summer after, here in the franklin&apos;s churchyard, mid-week day [Wednesday] in mid-moot; and every man shall be fined three marks that hath to pay a fine if he do not tell the law-speaker thereof, and also who have been the witnesses of the payment.

<p n=11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> It is [right] also, when the law-speaker hath had the law-speaking three summers, then shall he say over the Moot-making [Section] the fourth summer on the first fast-day [Friday] of the moot, and then he is free from the law-speaking if he choose.

<pb id=pb349a n=349><p n=12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> But if he wish to keep the law-speaking longer, if the others allow him, then the more part of the law-court-men shall decide.

<p n=13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> It is [right] also that the law-speaker be fined three marks if he come not to All-moot the first fast-day [Friday] before men go to law-hill save for lawful and necessary impediment; and then men may take another law-speaker if they will.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 lang=is id=thingscapa rend="align-with(en.thingscapa)">
<head><hi rend=sc>Þingscapa Þóttr</hi> (Cd. Reg.).</head>


<p n=1><anchor id=a349.8>Þat es mælt í l&aolig;gom órom, at ver scolom fióra eiga fiórðungs-dóma.

<p n=2><anchor id=a349.9>Skal goðe hverr nefna mann í dóm es fornt goðorð hefer oc <anchor id=a349.10>fullt: en þau ero full goðorð oc forn, es þing vóro þriú í fiórðunge<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a349.11>hverjom, en goðar þrír í þinge hverjo: þá vóro þing ó-sliten.

<p n=3><anchor id=a349.12>Ef goðorð ero smæra deilð, oc scolo þeir svá til scifta, es hlut <anchor id=a349.13>hafa af fornom goðorðom, at svá sé nefnt sem nú es taleð. Þá ero <anchor id=a349.14>fiórðungs-dómar fuller.

<p n=4><anchor id=a349.15>Þat es mælt; at dómar scolo í dag vesa nefnder eða ráðner:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a349.16>scal goðe hverr nefna sínn þriðiungs-mann í dóm, nema hann hafe <anchor id=a349.17>l&aolig;grétto-manna lof til annars.

<p n=5><anchor id=a349.18>Scal carl-mann tolf vetra gamlan eða ellra nefna í dóm, þann <anchor id=a349.19>es fyrer orðe eða eiðe cann at ráða, friálsan mann oc <anchor id=a349.20>heimiles-fastan.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=6><anchor id=a349.21>Þann mann scal eige nefna í dóm es sócnar-aðile es, eða varnar-aðile, <anchor id=a349.22>eða hann hefer s&aolig;c hand-selða, eða v&aolig;rn hand-selða svá at <anchor id=a349.23>nú sé búen til þings.

<pb id=pb350 n=350><p n=7><anchor id=a350.1>Þann mann scal eige í dóm nefna, es eige hefer mál numet í <anchor id=a350.2>barn-&oeacute;sco á Dansca Tungo, eðr<note place=apparatus id=an350.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eðr]</ab> aðr, Cd.</note> hann hefer veret þriá vetr á Íslande <anchor id=a350.3>eða lengr.

<p n=8><anchor id=a350.4>Ef sá lætr í dóm nefnasc es nú vas frá sciliðr, eða selr hann <anchor id=a350.5>&aolig;ðrom manne s&aolig;cena, af þvi at hann vill láta í dóm nefnasc, oc<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a350.6>verðr hann útlagr um þat þrimr m&aolig;rcom, oc ónýt m&aoacute;l hans, <anchor id=a350.7>sócner eða varner, ef hann átte, nema hann gete þann kvið, at <anchor id=a350.8>hann visse eige, at sacar vóro búnar á h&aolig;nd hónom.

<p n=9><anchor id=a350.9>Ef goðe nefner þann mann í dóm, es frá vas sciliðr, eða nefner <anchor id=a350.10>í annan dóm an hann hafe hloteð, oc es hann útlagr um þat hvárt-tveggja<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a350.11>þrimr m&aolig;rcom, oc or goðorðe, nema hann gete þann kvið, <anchor id=a350.12>at hann visse eige at hinn hefðe s&aolig;c eða v&aolig;rn hand-selða, eða <anchor id=a350.13>hann vere sócnar aðile eða varnar.

<p n=10><anchor id=a350.14>At L&aolig;gberge scal stefna goðanom, oc kveðja heimiles-búa hans, <anchor id=a350.15>oc á hverr at s&oeacute;kja þá s&aolig;c es vill.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=11><anchor id=a350.16>Goðe scal ganga í hamra-scarð, oc setja niðr þar dómanda sínn, <anchor id=a350.17>ef hann vill dóm nefna; oc nefna ser vátta tvá eða fleire, &lsquo;nefne <anchor id=a350.18>ec [N. N. oc M. M.] í þat vætte, at ec nefne þenna þegn í dóm&rsquo; oc <anchor id=a350.19>nefna hinn á nafn &lsquo;at d&oeacute;ma um sacar þær allar es her coma í dóm <anchor id=a350.20>þenna, oc l&aolig;g scylda hann til um at d&oeacute;ma; oc býð-ec til sacar-s&oeacute;kjanda<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a350.21>oc sacar-verjanda at ryðja dóm þenna; oc ann-ec hónom <anchor id=a350.22>íseto í dóme, nema l&aolig;g-rengð rétt come til, þá fæ-ec annan réttan <anchor id=a351.1><pb id=pb351 n=351>í stað hans, ef hann es or numenn at l&aolig;gom&rsquo;&mdash;oc kveða á í hvern <anchor id=a351.2>dóm hann nefner&mdash;&lsquo;oc nefne-ec l&aolig;g-dóm.&rsquo;

<p n=12><anchor id=a351.3>Dómar scolo út fara Þvátt-dag; oc vesa úte til hruðningar unz <anchor id=a351.4>sól c&oelig;mr á Þingv&aolig;ll Dróttins-dag.

<p n=13><anchor id=a351.5>Ef þá má eige ganga þurrt í holmenn....<note place=apparatus id=an351.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> The rest of this clause is missing.</note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab>



<p n=14><anchor id=a351.6>Menn scolo í dag oc á morgin lýsa sacar þær allar es til fiórðungs <anchor id=a351.7>dóms scal: enda es iamn-rétt at lýsa annan dag vico, ef menn vilja <anchor id=a351.8>þat í þing-sc&aolig;pom hafa.

<p n=15><anchor id=a351.9>Oc svá ef menn vilja lýsa um tiundar m&aoacute;l, þeir menn es til <anchor id=a351.10>þeirrar sócnar ero tecner, eða aðilja ero, eða þeir es af þeim hafa<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a351.11>tecet, þá scolo þeir menn eige hafa síðarr lýst an nú es taleð.

<p n=16><anchor id=a351.12>En aðrer menn eigo at lýsa um tiundar-m&aoacute;l unz dómar fara út.

<p n=17><anchor id=a351.13>Ef maðr vill lýsa s&aolig;c á h&aolig;nd manne, hann scal nefna ser vátta <anchor id=a351.14>þriá<note place=apparatus id=an351.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> iij, Cd., <hi>read</hi> tva?</note> eða fleire: &lsquo;nefne-ec í þat vætte [N. N. oc M. M.], at ec lýse <anchor id=a351.15>s&aolig;c á h&aolig;nd hónom&rsquo;&mdash;oc nefna hinn á nafn,&mdash;oc kveða á s&aolig;cena,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a351.16>oc svá hvat hann telr hónom varða.

<p n=18><anchor id=a351.17>Hann scal lýsa at L&aolig;gberge svá at meire hlutr manna sé hiá, oc <anchor id=a351.18>l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr; oc lýsa l&aolig;g-lýsing; oc hand-selða s&aolig;c, ef svá es; <anchor id=a351.19>oc lýsa til fiórðungs-dóms. Geta scal þess ef sú es s&aolig;c es hann <anchor id=a351.20>lýste fyrra sumar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>



<p n=19><anchor id=a351.21>Menn eigo at spyrja at þing-feste manna, þeirra es menn vilja <anchor id=a352.1><pb id=pb352 n=352>s&oeacute;kja her á þinge; oc spyrja í dag, eða á morgin, ef menn vilja <anchor id=a352.2>dóm ryðja: enda es rétt at spyrja unz dómar fara út til sócnar.

<p n=20><anchor id=a352.3>Sá maðr es hann vill vita þing-vist annars, hann scal nefna ser <anchor id=a352.4>vátta, &lsquo;nefne-ec [N. N.] í þat vette,&rsquo; scal hann kveða, &lsquo;at ec spyrr <anchor id=a352.5>b&oeacute;ndr alla í heyranda hlióðe at L&aolig;gberge, hverr l&aolig;g-grið hafe<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a352.6>hand-salat N. N.; es mec þat under frétt þeirre, at ec vil vita <anchor id=a352.7>hverja búa ec scal kveðja til sacar þeirrar es ec hefe h&aolig;fðað á h&aolig;nd <anchor id=a352.8>hónom: spyr ec l&aolig;g-spurning.&rsquo; Hann scal nefna vátta at sv&aolig;rom <anchor id=a352.9>þeim es verða.

<p n=21><anchor id=a352.10>Ef maðr gengr við heimiles-fange þess mannz es hann spurðe at,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a352.11>oc svá þótt enge gange við: hann scal enn nefna vátta [N. N. oc <anchor id=a352.12>M. M.], í þat vette, &lsquo;at ec spyr goða alla í heyranda hlióðe at L&aolig;gberge, <anchor id=a352.13>hverr ser kenne N. N. at þing-manne eða þriðiungs-manne: <anchor id=a352.14>es mic þat under frétt þesse, at ec vil vita í hvern fiórðungs-dóm <anchor id=a352.15>es scal s&oeacute;kja s&aolig;c á h&aolig;nd hónom: spyr ec l&aolig;g-spurning.&rsquo; Hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a352.16>scal nefna vátta at sv&aolig;rom þeim es verða.

<p n=22><anchor id=a352.17>En ef maðr gengr við þing-feste þess mannz es at vas spurt, þá <anchor id=a352.18>á hann at segja í þann dóm s&aolig;c sína es sá goðe es í fiórðunge es <anchor id=a352.19>í gegn gecc þing-feste hans.

<p n=23><anchor id=a352.20>Hann á þann goða at kveðja tylftar-kviðar<note place=apparatus id=an352.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tylftar-]</ab> xii, Cd.</note>, ef sú s&aolig;c es, es<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a352.21>tylftar-kviðr c&oelig;mr til: þó es rétt at hann spyre hann sialfan at <anchor id=a353.1><pb id=pb353 n=353>grið-fange síno oc þing-vist sínne, oc verðr þat iamn-fullt sem þá es <anchor id=a353.2>goðe gengr við þing-feste hans.

<p n=24><anchor id=a353.3>Rétt es at goðe gange við þing-feste hans, meðan eige ero hlutaðar <anchor id=a353.4>fram-s&aolig;gor saca, enda sé eige áðr cvatt tylftar-kviðar<note place=apparatus id=an353.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> xii.</note>: enda es <anchor id=a353.5>iamn-rétt at ganga við þing-feste mannz með vátta, þó at eige sé at<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a353.6>L&aolig;gberge, ef hann fiðr hinn sialfan....



<p n=25><anchor id=a353.7>Goðar aller scolo coma til þings v dag vico es tio vicor ero af <anchor id=a353.8>sumre, áðr sól gange af Þing-velle. En ef þeir coma eige svá, þá <anchor id=a353.9>ero þeir útlager, oc af goðorðe síno, nema nauðsynjar bere til, <anchor id=a353.10>ef þeir coma eige. Sam-þings-goðar eigo at ráða því hverr með<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a353.11>goðorð scal fara oc upp taca, þriðiungs-manna þess goða es heima <anchor id=a353.12>sitr.

<p n=26><anchor id=a353.13>Þing-heyiendr scolo coma enn v dag vico til þings, oc fara til <anchor id=a353.14>búðar með þeim goða, es þeir ero í þinge með, oc scal hverr <anchor id=a353.15>þeirra hafa tiald um þvera búð. Þá scal hverr þeirra taca ping-farar-caup<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a353.16>en gialda eige: enda es hverr-þeirra þing-heyiande bæðe <anchor id=a353.17>um sín m&aoacute;l oc annarra manna.

<p n=27><anchor id=a353.18>Goðenn es þá scyldr at fá hónom búðar-rúm: ef hann fær <anchor id=a353.19>hónom eige, oc varðar þing-mannenom eige við l&aolig;g, at hann fare <anchor id=a353.20>til annarrar búðar, oc á hann þó at heimta ping-farar-caupet.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=28><anchor id=a353.21>Nú c&oelig;mr maðr eige til &aolig;ndorz<note place=apparatus id=an353.2><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> ondverz, Cd.</note> þings, enda come hann Dróttens-dagenn <anchor id=a354.1><pb id=pb354 n=354>fyrra í þinge, oc es sá þó þing-heyiande, bæðe um sín m&aoacute;l <anchor id=a354.2>oc annarra manna; oc scal hann eige gialda þing-farar-caup, enda <anchor id=a354.3>scal hann eige taca; oc scal hann eige fara af þinge fyrer þing-lausner, <anchor id=a354.4>nema lofat sé: ef hann ferr oc varðar hónom fiorbaugs-garð. <anchor id=a354.5>Rétt es at hann tace þing-farar-caup, ef hann gengr í dóma<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a354.6>eða berr kviðo.

<p n=29><anchor id=a354.7>Rétt es at nefna þá menn í dóm, es til þings coma fyrr an dómar <anchor id=a354.8>sé nefnder.

<p n=30><anchor id=a354.9>Þeir menn aller es sacar hafa at s&oeacute;kja eða verja, eða menn ero <anchor id=a354.10>kvadder þing-farar, at<note place=apparatus id=an354.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> superabundant.</note> þeir scolo coma Dróttens-dag enn fyrra í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a354.11>þinge: ef þeir coma eige svá, þá ero ónýtar sacar þeirra, oc svá <anchor id=a354.12>varner þær es þeir bera framm: enda virðasc einscis vætte þau es <anchor id=a354.13>þeir bera, ef þeir vóro heiman kvadder.

<p n=31><anchor id=a354.14>Ef maðr c&oelig;mr síðarr an Dróttens-dag enn fyrra í þinge, oc es <anchor id=a354.15>sá eige þing-heyiande, hvártke um sín m&aoacute;l né annarra manna, oc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a354.16>scal hann ríða af þinge þá es hann vill; oc scal hann gialda þing-farar-caup <anchor id=a354.17>en eige taca.

<p n=32><anchor id=a354.18>Menn scolo svá gialda þing-farar-caup sem þeir ero á sátter í <anchor id=a354.19>þriðiunge hverjom við goðann.

<p n=33><anchor id=a354.20>Þing-heyendr scolo eige vesa um nótt af þinge eða lengr: þá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a354.21>ero þeir af þinge es þeir ero or þing-marce. Fara eigo menn um <anchor id=a354.22>daga at leita hrossa sínna, svá at eige dvele þat g&aolig;gn fyrer m&aolig;n&shy;nom, <anchor id=a354.23>eða dóm-nefno fyrer goðom, ef hann vill þá í dóm nefna, <anchor id=a355.1><pb id=pb355 n=355>eða hafa þá í noccorom l&aolig;g-scilom með ser. En ef þeir fara, oc <anchor id=a355.2>es þat þings-afgl&aolig;pon oc varðar f. b. g.

<p n=34><anchor id=a355.3>B&oeacute;ndr ero þing-heyiendr, oc goðar; oc þeir menn es þing-farar <anchor id=a355.4>oc gagna ero heiman kvadder.

<p n=35><anchor id=a355.5>Ef þing-heyiendr fara eige til búðar með goða þeim es þeir ero í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a355.6>þinge með, oc vill goðenn s&oeacute;kja þá um, oc scal hann stefna hónom <anchor id=a355.7>at L&aolig;gberge, oc láta varða þriggja marca útlegð, oc stefna þar til dóms.

<p n=36><anchor id=a355.8>Ef hinn ræðr at hlaupa or þriðiunge goðans fyrer þat es hann <anchor id=a355.9>vas sóttr, þá varðar hónom þriggja marca secð við goðann, oc <anchor id=a355.10>scal þeirre s&aolig;c stefna heiman, oc kveðja heimiles-búa fimm á þinge<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a355.11>þess mannz es sóttr es, hvárt sem hann f&oeacute;re af því á braut eða eige.



<p n=37><anchor id=a355.12>Ver scolom fara til L&aolig;gbergs á morgin, oc f&oeacute;ra dóma út til <anchor id=a355.13>hruðningar svá et síðarsta at sól sé á giá-hamre enom vestra or <anchor id=a355.14>L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz rúme at siá á L&aolig;gberge.

<p n=38><anchor id=a355.15>L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr scal fyrstr út ganga, ef hann hefer heilende til:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a355.16>þá eigo goðar at ganga með dómendr sína ef þeim es meina-laust; <anchor id=a355.17>ella scal hverr þeirra geta mann fyrer sic. Þá scal goðe <anchor id=a355.18>setja niðr dómanda sínn, oc scal hvers þeirra for-ráð iamn-rétt es <anchor id=a355.19>þá es til tecenn.

<p n=39><anchor id=a355.20>L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr scal ráða oc at kveða hvar hverge dómr scal<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a355.21>sitja, oc scal l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr láta hringja til dóma út-f&oeacute;rslo.

<p n=40><anchor id=a355.22>Þeim es rétt sacar at s&oeacute;kja oc verja, es þar ero comner Dróttens-dag <anchor id=a356.1><pb id=pb356 n=356>enn fyrra í þinge, en &oelig;ngom þeim es síðarr c&oelig;mr: nema þeir <anchor id=a356.2>atburðer verðe, at sacar g&oelig;rðesc svá síðarliga eða upp cveme, at <anchor id=a356.3>þeir mætte eige comasc fyrr til þings an efter Dróttens-dagenn: <anchor id=a356.4>oc verða þeir menn þó saca s&oeacute;kjendr oc þing-heyiendr um þau <anchor id=a356.5>m&aoacute;l &aolig;ll es þeir h&aolig;fðo með at fara, ef þeir cvómo svá snimma, at<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a356.6>gagna<note place=apparatus id=an356.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> ganga, Cd.</note> mætte fyrr til kveðja an dómar f&oeacute;re út: þeir eigo eige dóma <anchor id=a356.7>at ryðja um sín m&aoacute;l....



<p n=41><anchor id=a356.8>... Þá scal goðenn ganga út oc nefna mann í dóm, oc scal hafa <anchor id=a356.9>nefndan áðr sól come á Þing-v&aolig;ll, ef ráð-rúm es at því ...

<p n=42><anchor id=a356.10>Ef goðenn viðr eigi dóm fullan áðr sól come á Þing-v&aolig;ll þá es<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a356.11>hann útlagr oc or goðorðe: oc svá ef hann nefner annan í dóm an <anchor id=a356.12>hann eige, þá á dómr at d&oeacute;ma um sacar allar sem fullr sé dómrenn.

<p n=43><anchor id=a356.13>Eige scal dóm ryðja lengr an sól come á Þing-v&aolig;ll.

<p n=44><anchor id=a356.14>Sá scal s&oeacute;kja goðann, es sótt vill hafa, til fullra laga, þeirra <anchor id=a356.15>manna es sacar hafa í dóm þann: en ef þeir bregðasc um, þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a356.16>scolo þeir hluta með ser, oc scal sá s&oeacute;kja es hlýtr.



<p n=45><anchor id=a356.17>Maðr scal cuatt hafa váttorða allra oc frum-cviða þeirra es s&aolig;c <anchor id=a356.18>hans eigo at fylga, áðr dómr fare út.

<p n=46><anchor id=a356.19>Rétt es at cveðja xii<hi rend=sup>ar</hi> cviða áðr dómr fare út, oc svá at dóme.

<p n=47><anchor id=a356.20>Þá es rétt cuatt, ef hann heyrer sialfr á, eða at rúme hans; ella<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a356.21>svá at búðu-nautar hans heyre.

<pb id=pb357 n=357><p n=48><anchor id=a357.1>Þar es maðr vill cueðja xii kviðar, hann scal nefna ser vátta <anchor id=a357.2>[N. N. oc M. M.], &lsquo;at því vette&rsquo; (scal hann cueða) &lsquo;at ec spyr þic <anchor id=a357.3>at því&rsquo; (oc nefna goðann) &lsquo;ef þu hefer goðorð fullt, at þú nefner <anchor id=a357.4>dóma fulla með; oc berr xii cuiðo: spyr-ec l&aolig;g-spurning.&rsquo;

<p n=49><anchor id=a357.5>Ef hann læzc hafa, oc scal hann nefna vátta at sv&aolig;rom hans, &lsquo;oc<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a357.6>at því vætte&rsquo; (scal hann cueða), &lsquo;at ec cueð þic xii kviðar&rsquo; (oc <anchor id=a357.7>nefna goðann, oc cueða á hvat hann cueðr hann), &lsquo;oc bera með <anchor id=a357.8>þriðiungs-menn þína ellefo, en þú ser sialfr enn tolfte: cueð ec <anchor id=a357.9>l&aolig;g-cu&aolig;ð.&rsquo;



<p n=50><anchor id=a357.10>Þar es maðr vill cueðja búa-cuiðar, hann scal ganga þangat til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a357.11>búðar es sá maðr es í es hann vill cvaddan hafa, oc es hónom <anchor id=a357.12>rétt at cveðja þar es hinn heyrer sialfr á: enda es hónom rétt at <anchor id=a357.13>cveðja at rúme hins es hann vill cvaddan hafa, svá at þar heyre <anchor id=a357.14>búðo-nautar.

<p n=51><anchor id=a357.15>Ef maðr veit eige hvárt hinn es búande eða grið-maðr, es hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a357.16>vill cvaddan hafa, oc á hann at spyrja hinn með vátta, hvárt hann <anchor id=a357.17>sé buande eða grið-maðr, oc segja hvat hónom es under frétt&shy;enne; <anchor id=a357.18>oc spyrja l&aolig;g-spurning, oc nefna vátta at sv&aolig;rom þeim es <anchor id=a357.19>verða.

<p n=52><anchor id=a357.20>Ef hann vill þann mann cveðja es þing-heyjande es, fyrer bú<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a357.21>annars mannz, oc á hann at spyrja með vátta, ef hann veit eige <anchor id=a357.22>áðr, hvárt hann eige þar l&aolig;g-heimile eða eige; eða sé hann þing-heyjande <anchor id=a358.1><pb id=pb358 n=358>fyrer bú þess mannz, oc nefna búandann. Hann scal <anchor id=a358.2>svá g&oelig;ra um cv&aolig;ð við hann sem hinn svarar hónom es spurðr es.

<p n=53><anchor id=a358.3>Ef sá vill ecci til segja es spurðr es, eða lýgr hann til, oc verðr <anchor id=a358.4>hann secr um þat þrimr m&aolig;rcom, oc á sá s&aolig;c við hann es hann <anchor id=a358.5>spurðe, eða búe sá es cvaddr es í stað hans, ef hinn vill eige s&aolig;c<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a358.6>hafa. S&aolig;c þeirre scal stefna at L&aolig;gberge, oc cveðja til heimilis-búa <anchor id=a358.7>hins fimm es sóttr es.

<p n=54><anchor id=a358.8>Ef maðr cveðr grið-menn, oc hugðe hann at búande være, eða <anchor id=a358.9>cveðr hann þann grið-mann fyrir annars mannz bú, es eigi átte <anchor id=a358.10>þar l&aolig;g-heimile, oc verðr hónom rétt sú cv&aolig;ð, þótt menn vile á<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a358.11>leita við hann, hvar-vetna þess es hann getr þann cvið, at hann <anchor id=a358.12>cvadde þá es hann hugðe at réttaster være, enda átte hann eige <anchor id=a358.13>cost at spyrja.

<p n=55><anchor id=a358.14>Ef maðr cveðr grið-menn búa-cviðar, eða þann fyrer bú mannz <anchor id=a358.15>es eige es þing-heyjande, oc cveðe hann svá, at þeir heyre á sialfer á<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a358.16>cv&aolig;ð hans, oc eige hann cost at spyrja l&aolig;g-fréttar ef hann vill, <anchor id=a358.17>oc ónýter hann þá málet fyrer ser, þar bergsc hann við biarg-cviðenn, <anchor id=a358.18>es hann cvadde þá svá, at þeir heyrðo eige á.



<p n=56><anchor id=a358.19><hi>Dóma-út-f&oelig;rslor</hi>.&mdash;Dómar scolo fara út þann dag es menn cveða <anchor id=a358.20>á, oc eige síðarr an sól c&oelig;mr á giá-bacca enn hærra frá L&aolig;g-berge<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a358.21>or l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz rúme at siá. Þá es l&aolig;gs&aolig;o-maðr oc <anchor id=a358.22>goðar aller scyllder til at ganga út með dómendr sína, oc svá þeir <anchor id=a358.23>menn es með sacar fara.

<pb id=pb359 n=359><p n=57><anchor id=a359.1>Sá maðr es með s&aolig;c ferr, þá verðr hann útlagr, ef hann gengr <anchor id=a359.2>með fleire menn an tio til dóms.

<p n=58><anchor id=a359.3>Ef sá maðr c&oelig;mr eige út es s&aolig;c hefer at s&oeacute;kja, þá es sól es <anchor id=a359.4>comen á giá-bacca enn vestra or l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz rúme at siá, oc <anchor id=a359.5>verðr hann secr um þat þrimr m&aolig;rcom, oc á sá s&aolig;c es hann hefer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a359.6>mál á h&aolig;ndom. Scal s&aolig;c þeirre stefna at L&aolig;gberge, oc cveðja <anchor id=a359.7>heimilis-búa fimm þess mannz es sóttr es, ef hann getr þann cvið, <anchor id=a359.8>at hann m&oelig;nde fyrr út coma, ef sól um sæe, oc versc hann þá <anchor id=a359.9>s&aolig;cenne<note place=apparatus id=an359.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ef sá maðr ... s&aolig;cenne]</ab> we have moved up to clauses.</note>.



<p n=59><anchor id=a359.10>Ef sex dómendr ero comner út eða fleire; at þat es rétt þeim<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a359.11>manne es með sacar ferr at bióða til hlut-falla at dóme þeim <anchor id=a359.12>m&aolig;nnom &aolig;llom es sacar hafa í dóm þann, oc cueða á stað þann <anchor id=a359.13>es þeir scolo hluta fram-s&aolig;gor með ser. Hverr maðr þeirra es <anchor id=a359.14>s&aolig;c hefer með at fara í dóm, þá scal hlut bera í scaut einn þótt <anchor id=a359.15>hann hafe fleire sacar í dóm þann.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=60><anchor id=a359.16>Hverr maðr scal merkja hlut sínn, oc bera alla saman í scaut, oc <anchor id=a359.17>scal maðr taca fióra hlute senn upp.

<p n=61><anchor id=a359.18>Þeir scolo fyrst segja sacar sínar framm sem hlióta, svá hverr at <anchor id=a359.19>&aolig;ðrom sem hloteð hafa.

<p n=62><anchor id=a359.20>Nú coma sumer eige til hlut-fallzens, þá scolo þeir síðarst framm<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a359.21>segja.

<p n=63><anchor id=a359.22>Þat es oc rétt at annarr maðr bere hlut hans í scaut, oc scal þá <anchor id=a360.1><pb id=pb360 n=360>at þeirra hluton framm segja: þær sacar scal eige hluta es eige <anchor id=a360.2>varð fyrra sumar um d&oeacute;mt; ef þær ero eige fleire an fiórar, enda <anchor id=a360.3>eige fære. Þá scolo þeir hluta með ser sacarnar, ef þær ero fleire <anchor id=a360.4>an fiórar. Þær scal allar fyrstar segja framm; en þær sacar næst <anchor id=a360.5>es her hafa g&oelig;rsc á þinge.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=64><anchor id=a360.6>Ef sá verðr eige búenn til es fyrstr hefer hloteð, þá scal sá biðja <anchor id=a360.7>lofs til, es síðarr hefer hloteð, at segja s&aolig;c sína fyrre framm; en <anchor id=a360.8>hann scal lofa hónom: en ef hann lofar hónom eige, þá es hónom rétt <anchor id=a360.9>at segja s&aolig;c sína framm, ef hinn es eige til búenn, ef dómendr lofa.

<p n=65><anchor id=a360.10>Sá maðr scal nefna ser vátta ... <hi lang=en-UK>See the translation.</hi><ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=66><anchor id=a360.11>Hann scal vinna eið at því ... <hi lang=en-UK>See the translation.</hi>


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 lang=en-UK id=en.thingscapa rend="display(none)">
<head><hi>The Moot-making Section.</hi></head>

<p n=1>It is spoken in our laws that we shall have four Quarter-courts. Each gode that hath an ancient and full gode-hood shall name a man to the doom-court. And they are full gode-hoods and ancient, when there were three moots in each Quarter, and three godes in each moot; when the moots were not divided.

<p n=3>If the gode-hoods are parted into pieces, then shall they that have the shares of the old gode-hood so act, that a man be named as was lately spoken. Then the Quarter-doom-courts shall be full.

<p n=4>It is spoken that the courts shall be named on an appointed day [the first Friday of the moot]. Every gode shall name a man of his own trithing to the court, save he have the leave of the law-court-men to take another.

<p n=5>A man must be twelve winters old or older to be named to the court, that can give his word or take his oath, a freeman and hearth-fast.

<p n=6>The man shall not be named to the court that is the pursuer or defender, or hath had that pursual handselled to him or that defence handselled to him, which is now ready for this moot.

<pb id=pb350a n=350><p n=7>The man shall not be named to the court who hath not learnt his speech in his childhood in the Danish tongue, or hath not been three winters in Iceland or longer.

<p n=8>If a man allow himself to be named to the court that hath now been excepted, or handsel his case to another because he wisheth to be named to this court, he shall pay an outlaw-fine of three marks, and his suit shall be invalid, be it pursual or defence that he hath, except he can get a verdict that he knew not that cases were ready to be brought that touch him.

<p n=9>If a gode name a man to court that is excepted therefrom, or name him to another court than is his, then he shall pay an outlaw-fine of three marks for each [of these cases], and shall be [put] out of his godehood, save he get a verdict that he knew not that he had a case or defence handselled, or that he were pursuer or defender....

<p n=10>At the law-hill the godes are to be summoned and his neighbours&apos;-quest be called, and any man that will may pursue the suit.

<p n=11>The gode shall go to the cleft of the rock and set down his dooms-man there, if he wish to name doom-court, and name to him witnesses, two or more&mdash;

<p>&lsquo;I name N. N. and M. M. as witness herein that I name this thane to court, and name him by name O. O. to doom all the cases that come here in this court, and which the laws bind him to doom, and I call on the pursuer of the case and the defender of this case to challenge this doom-court. And I grant him to sit in court, save lawful challenge stand in the way, and then I shall put another right man <pb id=pb351a n=351>in his stead, if he be lawfully taken out,&rsquo; and he shall now say what doom-court he names him to, &lsquo;and I name a lawful doom-court.&rsquo;

<p n=12>The courts shall go forth on Saturday, and be out for challenge until the sun come over the Tingwald [9 a.m.] on the Lord&apos;s-day.

<p n=13>If one may not go out dryshod to the holm [<hi>the apodosis is missing</hi>].


<p><hi>Of Notice of Suits.</hi>

<p n=14>Men shall to-day and to-morrow [Friday or Saturday] give notice of all cases that shall go to the Quarter-court, and it is just as lawful to give notice of them the second day of the week [Monday] if men will have it so in the Moot-setting <hi>Rules</hi>.

<p n=15>And so if men wish they that are appointed to sue or are the chief suitors may give notice of a case on tithe-law, or that have taken the suit from them, and these men shall not have longer time than is now said. But other men ought to give notice of tithe-cases before the courts go forth.

<p n=17>If a man wish to give notice of a case against a man he shall name to himself three witnesses or more, &lsquo;I name in witness to this N. N. and M. M., and I give notice of my case against him and name him by name L. L.&rsquo;, and he shall declare his charge, and also what he reckoneth he is liable to.

<p n=18>He must give notice at the law-hill when the more part of men and the law-speaker be by, and give lawful notice, and handsel the case if so he will; and give notice of the Quarter-court. And he must declare whether the case were given notice of last summer.


<p><hi>Of enquiring for men&apos;s Moot-hold or curial domicile.</hi>

<p n=19>Men ought to enquire into the curial allegiance of men when they <pb id=pb352a n=352>wish to sue here at the moot, and enquire to-day [Friday] or to-morrow [Saturday] if men wish to challenge the court, and it is lawful to enquire until the courts go forth for the suits.

<p n=20>The man that will know the curial domicile of another, he must name himself witnesses. &lsquo;I name N. N. in witness of this,&rsquo; shall he declare, &lsquo;that I enquire of all the franklins within hearing of my voice at the law-hill, who hath handselled M. M. legal asylum, and this is my reason for the asking, that I wish to know what neighbours I shall call as quest in this case that I have set up against him. I enquire with a lawful enquiry.&rsquo; He shall name witnesses to the answer that he may get.

<p n=21>If a man acknowledge giving a home to the man that is enquired after, and even though no one acknowledge, he shall also name witnesses N. N. and M. M., in witness of this, &lsquo;that I enquire of all the godes within hearing of my voice at the law-hill, which of them acknowledge O. O. as his moot-man or trithing&apos;s-man. And this is my reason for the asking, that I wish to know in what Quarter-court I shall pursue the suit against him. I enquire with a lawful enquiry,&rsquo; He shall name witnesses to the answer that he may get.

<p n=22>But if a man acknowledge the curial allegiance of the man that is enquired after, then he ought to set forth his suit in that court which belongs to the Quarter that the gode-hood belongs to who acknowledges his curial allegiance.

<p n=23>He ought to summon this gode to a quest-of-twelve, if the case be one in which a quest-of-twelve comes in. Yet it is lawful that he enquire himself <pb id=pb353a n=353>as to his grith-taking or receiving of asylum or his curial domicile, and it is full as good as if the gode had acknowledged his curial allegiance.

<p n=24>It is lawful that the gode acknowledge his curial allegiance, while as yet they have not cast lots for the order of the cases, and if the quest of twelve have not already been called. And it is just as right to acknowledge a man&apos;s curial allegiance with witness, though it be not at the hill of laws, if he meet him himself.


<p><hi>How the Gode shall come to the Moot.</hi>

<p n=25>All godes shall come to moot the fifth day [Thursday] of the week when there are ten weeks of summer, before the sun goes off Tingwald [c. 9 a.m.]. And if they do not come so they are under outlaw-fine and out of their gode-hoods, unless there be some necessities for their not coming. The godes of the same moot must agree which of the men of the trithing shall bring up and carry out the gode-hood of the gode that sits at home.

<p n=26>They that belong to the moot shall come on the fifth day of the week [Thursday] to the moot, and go to the booth with the gode in whose moot they are, and each of them shall have a tilt across the booth. Then every one of them shall take moot-fare-pay, but not pay it, and each of them is a full member of the moot both for his own case and that of other men.

<p n=27>The gode is bound to give him booth-room. If he cannot, then the moot-man is not liable to the laws. If he go to another booth, then he ought still to have his share of the moot-fare-pay.

<p n=28>Now if a man come not to the beginning of the moot [Thursday, <pb id=pb354a n=354>Friday, Saturday], but cometh on the first Lord&apos;s-day of the moot, still he is a full member of the moot, both for his own case and those of other men; and he shall not pay moot-fare-pay nor receive it, and he shall not go away from the moot before the moot-breaking save leave be given him. If he go then he comes under the life-ring-garth fine. It is lawful that he take moot-fare-pay if he go into a court [as doomster] or giveth a quest-verdict.

<p n=29>It is right to name those men to the courts that come to the moot before the courts be named.

<p n=30>All men that have suits to pursue or defend, or men that are quest-summoned to moot, should come the first Lord&apos;s-day of the moot. If they do not come so their cases are null, and their defences likewise which they are sustaining, and no witness they bear is of worth if they be summoned on quest from home.

<p n=31>If a man come later than the first Lord&apos;s-day of the moot then he is no full member of the moot, neither for his own suit nor for the suits of others, and he shall ride off the moot if he will, and he shall pay the moot-fare-pay but not receive any.

<p n=32>Men shall pay the moot-fare-pay as they have agreed in each trithing with the gode.

<p n=33>Members of the moot shall not be a night or longer off the moot. They are off the moot when they are outside the moot-marks. Men may go by day to look after their horses, but yet so that there be no delay in men&apos;s law-business, or in naming courts before the godes, in <pb id=pb355a n=355>case he wish to name them to a court or to have them with him in any law-dealings. And if they go they come under the life-ring-garth fine.

<p n=34>Franklins and godes are <hi rend=sc>members of the moot</hi>, and those men are <hi rend=sc>moot-farers</hi> that are called as quest from home.

<p n=35>If a moot-member will not go to the booth of the gode that he is in moot with, and the gode wish to sue him therefore, then he shall summon him at the law-hill and let him pay three marks outlaw-fine, and summon a court therefore.

<p n=36>If he doth run out of the trithing of a gode before he is sued, then he must pay a convict-fine of three marks to the gode, and this suit shall be summoned from the homestead, and a quest of five neighbours called at the moot of the man that is sued whether he have gone abroad out of it or no.


<p><hi>Of going to the Hill of Laws.</hi>

<p n=37>We shall go to the law-hill to-morrow [Saturday], and bring the courts out for challenge at the latest when the sun is seen above the west cliff of the ravine <hi>or</hi> geow [c. 5 p.m.], from the law-speaker&apos;s place on the law-hill.

<p n=38>The law-speaker shall walk out first, if he have the health so to do, then the godes with their doomsters ought to walk, if there be no impediment to their so doing, and if so each shall get a man to act for him.

<p>Then the gode shall set down his doomsters, and each shall have just the same power as he for whom he stands.

<p n=39>The law-speaker shall rule and give his decision where each court shall sit, and the law-speaker shall have the bell rung for the going forth of the courts.

<p n=40>They have the right to sue or defend that come here the first Lord&apos;s-day <pb id=pb356a n=356>of the moot, and none of them that come later, save this have happened, that a deed was done so late or known so late that they could not get to the moot before, until after the Lord&apos;s-day, and these men shall have the pursual of their suits, and be full members of the moot, for all the cases that they have to do with there if they come early enough to set forth their quest-calling before the courts go forth. They must not challenge the court in their own case.


<p><hi>Part of the Section on challenging the Court.</hi>

<p n=41>Then shall a gode go forth and name a man to court, and have him named before the sun come on to the Tingwald, if there be....

<p n=42>If a gode cannot get a full court before the sun come on the Tingwald [c. 9 a.m. Monday morning] then he is [under] outlaw-[fine] and out of his gode-hood, and so if he names them into another court than his, and the court must doom all cases as if it were full.

<p n=43>The court must not be challenged later than when the sun comes on the Tingwald [9 a.m.].

<p n=44>He that will of them that have cases in this court shall sue the gode to the full law, and if they contend over it then they shall cast lots among themselves, and he upon whom the lot falleth shall have the suit.


<p><hi>Of Witness.</hi>

<p n=45>A man shall have summoned all witnesses and first quests of them that have to follow his suit before the court go forth.

<p n=46>It is right that he call the quest of twelve before the court go forth, and also at the court.

<p n=47>It is a right summons if he himself hear it or in his place if his booth-mates hear it.

<pb id=pb357a n=357><p n=48>When a man wish to call a quest of twelve he shall name witnesses to himself N. N. and M. M., by witness of whom he shall call. &lsquo;I ask thee this,&rsquo; and name the gode, &lsquo;if thou hast full gode-hood that thou can name a full court and can bring up a quest of twelve. I enquire of thee a lawful enquiry.&rsquo;

<p n=49>If he say he have, then he shall name witnesses to his answer, and by their witness he shall summon. &lsquo;I call on thee for a quest of twelve,&rsquo; and name the gode, and declare what is the case he calls him for, &lsquo;and to bring with thee eleven of the men of thy trithing, but thou thyself shalt be the twelfth. I summon a legal quest.&rsquo;


<p><hi>Quests of Neighbours.</hi>

<p n=50>When a man will call a quest of neighbours, he shall go thither to the booth of the man that he will have called therein, and it will be lawful for him to call him so that he hear it himself, and it will be lawful for him to call at his place when he wishes to call, so that his booth-mates may hear.

<p n=51>If a man know not whether he be a householder or under grith whom he wisheth to have called, then he ought to enquire of him before witnesses whether he be a freeholder or under grith, and say what his reason is for asking, and enquire with a lawful enquiry, and name witness to the answer that he shall get.

<p n=52>If he wish to call a man that is a moot-member for another man&apos;s holding then he ought to enquire with witnesses, if he knew it not before, whether he owns lawful domicile there or not, and whether he be moot-member for such a man&apos;s holding, and name the franklin. And <pb id=pb358a n=358>so he shall speak in his summons as the other answers him that which he enquireth of him.

<p n=53>But if he that is enquired of will not answer or lies about the matter then he is convict for a three-mark fine, and he that enquireth of him hath the pursual, or the neighbour that is summoned in his stead, if he will not take the case. Their case shall be summoned at the law-hill, and a quest called of five neighbours of him that is pursued.

<p n=54>If a man summon a man under grith and thinketh that he is a franklin, or summons a grith-man on another man&apos;s holding that yet hath not lawful domicile there, yet the summons will be right, though men try to question it, if so be that he can get a quest to say that he summoned him whom he thought to be a most lawful man, and had no means of enquiry.

<p n=55>If a man call grith-men on a quest of neighbours, or the steward of him that is not a member of the moot, and he summons him so that they themselves may hear his summons, and hath the means to put a lawful question if he chose, then his case is null. Yet he may save himself by a saving quest-verdict, that he gave the summons so that they did not hear him.


<p><hi>The going forth of the Courts.</hi>

<p n=56>The courts shall go forth on the appointed day [Saturday], and no later than when from the hill of laws out of the law-speaker&apos;s place the sun can be seen to come on the bank of the upper rift [5 p. m.], when the law-speaker and the godes are all bound to walk forth with their doomsters, also those men that have causes.

<pb id=pb359a n=359><p n=57>The man that hath a cause he becometh an outlaw if he go with more men than ten to the court.

<p n=58>If a man come not out that hath a suit to sue by the time the sun can be seen from the law-speaker&apos;s seat to have come on the west bank of the rift he shall then be convict for a three-mark fine, and he shall win the suit that he hath the case against. This suit shall be summoned at the hill of laws, and a quest called of five neighbours of him that is sued. If he can get the verdict that he would have come before the sun&apos;s coming was seen then he upsets the case.


<p><hi>Of the Casting of Lots.</hi>

<p n=59>If six doomsters or more are come out it is right for them that have causes to plead to cast lots for the court for all them that have causes in the court, and point out the place where they are to cast lots among themselves for the order of taking their cases.

<p n=60>Every man of them that hath a cause to go to court shall put in a cloth one lot, even though he have more cases than one before the court. Every man should mark his lot, and they shall put them altogether in the cloths, and then a man could take up four<note n=1 id=n359.1>One for each Quarter-court, probably.</note> lots together.

<p n=62>They shall first plead their cases whom the lot falls to, one after the other as the lot hath fallen.

<p n=63>Now if any come not to the lot-casting they shall plead their cases <pb id=pb360a n=360>last. It shall also be right that a second man put his lot in the cloth, and then they shall plead according to their lots. Those cases shall not be put to the lot that were not judged the last summer, if they be not more or less than four. But they shall be put to the lot among themselves if there be more than four of them. All these cases shall be pleaded first, and the cases next that have begun here at this moot.

<p n=64>If a man was not ready when the lots were first cast, then he shall ask leave of the man that had the last lot to plead his case before his, and he shall give him leave; but if he gave him not leave, then he hath the right to plead his cause, if he be not ready [at the first], by the leave of the doomsters.


<!-- TRANSLATION ENDS HERE -->

</div2>

<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<div2>
<head><hi>Prayer to listen to Oath-taking or Oath-spelling.</hi></head>

<p>The man that will plead a case shall name himself witnesses. &lsquo;I name N. N. and M. M. to witness this, that I pray this man that I will here sue by suit to listen to my oath-spelling and to my setting forth of my cause, or the man that hath the defence for him, and the gode that bringeth the quest of twelve about the man that he hath a suit against.&rsquo;

<div2>
<head><hi>Of setting forth or pleading a Case.</hi></head>

<p>He shall take an oath that pleadeth his case, and call the quest to witness whom he summoned and for what he summoned him, and what penalty he laid on him, and call the quest to witness to what moot he summoned him, and that he summoned a lawful summons, and he setteth forth his cause as it hath been in court against N. N. when he summoned him. Then shall one of them bear witness and keep all the words in his witness-bearing that he [the principal] had in his summons, and the others shall yield consent to the witness that he hath thus borne, etc.

<p>[<hi>After sections on witnesses, challenges, quest verdicts, of witness against verdict of quest, the defence, the summing-up by both parties, the doomsters, disagreement of the court, from which the following maxims are culled, there follows a later addition on the Fifth Court.</hi>]

<p>The pursuit shall come before the defence in every case.

<p>Before a man bring forward his defence he shall enquire with witnesses of the man that hath the suit against him if he have brought forth his suit against him as he thinketh or hath not. Then he ought to answer that he hath brought forward his suit as he thinketh it, save anything come up in his defence that be.

<p>Then when these words are spoken it is lawful to begin the defence.

<p>When men have brought forward their suit and defence as they will <pb id=pb361 n=361>in the court, then every man that hath a suit or defence in the court shall have a summing-man for his case, whether he be pursuer or defender.

<p>It shall be also before they give their judgment, they [the doomsters] shall also take an oath unless they have done so before. They shall name themselves witnesses. &lsquo;I name N. N. and M. M. witness to this, that I take an oath on the cross, a lawful oath, and say to God that I will deem this doom as I believe the law to be.&rsquo;


<div2>
<head><hi>Of the Fifth Court.</hi></head>

<p>We shall have a Court the Fifth, that is called the Fifth Court.

<p>Men shall be named to this court from each of the old gode-hoods, nine men out of each Quarter. The godes that have new gode-hood they shall name another twelve men to the court, and there shall be four twelves there; and there are twelve men out of each Quarter among them.

<p>And the fifth court shall be appointed when the Quarter-courts are named, but they shall not go forth together to their jurisdictions unless the law-court-men agree otherwise.

<p>And the fifth court shall sit in the law-court.

<p>These cases shall come into the fifth court: lying verdicts that are borne here at the moot, or lying witnesses, or what a man declares what is wrong on his manhood, and disagreements of court that take place here, or offering of bribes or taking of bribes that hap here, and also if men bargain for money here, and all the false witness that happeneth here on the All-moot, and the maintenance of outlaws that are here without guile convicted, and withal are reckoned cases of housing bond-debtors, and of the thralls of them that are declared here at the All-moot to be debt-fast <hi>or</hi> bond-debtors, and also where men take labour from these men, and the harbouring of church priests and also of communion with those that do otherwise than is spoken in the laws. Of all these cases that have now been reckoned there shall be notice given to-day and to-morrow [Friday and Saturday], and it is lawful the second day of the week [Monday] and the third [Tuesday], if they be not holidays.

<div2>
<head><hi>Court of Leet or Execution.</hi></head>

<p>A court of leet <hi>or</hi> execution [féráns-dómr] shall be held upon every man that hath become convicted when fourteen nights be gone from the moot where he was convicted.

<p>The court shall be held where his domicile was when the suit was brought against him before he was convicted.

<p>The court shall be called <hi>or</hi> named outside the house-garth where there is neither acre nor mead, but yet not farther off than ear-shot distance of the house-garth.

<p>Men are bound to follow the gode to the court of leet, all they that are nearest if he will summon them, whether they be his moot-men or no. Three marks outlaw-fine he pays that refuseth if he get a full court, but otherwise a neck-ring-garth [fine].

<p>He shall come there before midday and name the court, and so shall those men come that have law business. There shall be a twelve thane-court. The court shall be challenged as a quest of twelve.... If there be two moots on one moot-field....

<div2>
<head><hi>Of the Spring Moot.</hi></head>

<p>We shall have a spring-moot in our land. Three godes shall have the moot together. They shall not have any moot longer than a week-moot, <pb id=pb362 n=362>and no shorter than a five nights&apos; moot save leave be asked of the court of laws.

<p>They shall not have the spring-moot later than when six weeks of the summer be gone and the soken-moot be ended. The spring-moot shall not be before the fourth week of the summer coming there.

<p>The gode shall name the court there, and each of them shall name twelve men to the court to doom all the cases that come into that court as the law binds them to do.... If men come later to the moot than one night ... their case is null....

<p>The courts shall go forth so that the cases all come therein before the sun be down, and men shall cast lots for the cases just as at the All-moot; and also take oaths and go about their suit and also their defence as at the All-moot. If men hold back any proofs the fine is the same as in All-moot, and they must be summoned at the moot-brink to the court.

<div2>
<head><hi>Of the Law of Leets.</hi></head>

<p>We shall have leets, and those godes that are over the moots together shall have the leets together, and their leet shall be where their moot-stead is, save they get leave for another.

<p>The leet shall not be later than the Lord&apos;s-day. When on the bathing-day [Saturday] before there are yet eight weeks of the summer alive, and the leet shall not be before it is fourteen nights from the All-moot. And the leet shall not be shorter than a day&apos;s leet, and no longer than a two nights&apos; leet.

<p>And the leet shall be hallowed just as a moot.

<p>There on a hallowed leet just as at a moot.

<p>There shall all novellae be said over, and the reckoning of the season, and the [days for] keeping ember days and the long fasts [Lent] beginning, and also if it be leap-year, or if the summer be ..., and also if men shall come to the All-moot before there be ten weeks of the summer gone.

<p>And the gode shall recite all particularly that owneth the moot hallowing, unless they have settled it otherwise among them.

<p>The moot-men all ought to make berths there when they are at moot if they wish; they ought to have their homes there while they are at leet or moot or make their berths.

<div2>
<head><hi>Of Outlaws.</hi></head>

<p>If men bring the man out hither that the same summer was made an outlaw, they shall be outlawed....

<p>If men bring out hither a man that was made an outlaw the summer before, they must do one of two things, either slay him or bring him to them that outlawed him in the half-month that they know that he was convicted. If they will do neither, then they shall be outlaws therefore....

<p>Wolf-hedin said it was lawful for a man to bring a suit for maintainance of outlaws or life-ring-men that are called <hi>wanderers</hi>.

<p>There shall be four Flitting Days here in this land. The first is when it is the fifth or sixth week of the summer. On this day a man has the choice of taking his domicile. The second is fast-day [Friday], the third is Saturday, the fourth is the Lord&apos;s-day.

<p>Now if a gode wish to go away from the country, then it is right that he say at the spring-moot who shall manage his gode-hood.



<pb id=pb363 n=363>
<div1 n=4 id=s2.4>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 4.</ab> NIAL AND THE FIFTH COURT.</head>

<p>In Nial&apos;s Saga, as we have it now, there is much law matter, but the greater part thereof is of the nature of a legal romance. But the passage relating to the creation of the Fifth Court is of a different colour and weight. It once in its essence formed part of the older <hi>Story of Nial</hi> from which the present complex Niala is partly composed, compiled or edited by its late 13th-century editor. One proof of this occurred to the editor while transcribing (in 1884) the texts for this book. It occurs in the phrase where Hilde-gund answers Flose&apos;s announcement of Haus-coll&apos;s desire to marry her. &lsquo;She said, that she was a proud woman. &ldquo;And I don&apos;t know how this match will do for me; first, there are <hi>impediments</hi>; and last, not least, the man has no chieftaincy.&rdquo;&rsquo; Touches such as this, pathetic and human, are in the very spirit of Nial&apos;s Saga. Hilde-gund, who is to be not the least victim of this ill-timed and unnatural marriage, feels as it were a shudder as she is asked for her consent, for there is the stain of blood-guilt between her husband and Nial and the spirit of the feud that calls for more blood still. After the brief and hurried reference to this ill-omened matter, she passes on, woman-like, to a less objectionable point, with the kind of half hope that it may settle the matter for her and save her the cost of refusal. Altogether an admirable bit of character-painting, with a touch of pathos as befits the note of warning and the first knell of falling fate.

<p>The text of all the MSS. extant, no small number (some eight vellums), instead of &lsquo;mein (<hi>impediments</hi>)&rsquo; here read &lsquo;menn (<hi>men</hi>),&rsquo; which is nonsense. It is evident that the archetype of our present form of Niala read &lsquo;menn;&rsquo; but equally evident that the old Saga, from which that archetype was taken, must have read &lsquo;mein.&rsquo; The confusion might easily occur in dictation: in MS. the two would read &lsquo;&mtilde;&rsquo; or &lsquo;mñ&rsquo; and &lsquo;mein.&rsquo; The oldest Story of Nial, therefore, preserved the tradition of Nial&apos;s connection with the creation of the Fifth Court.

<p>The piece which we have placed at the end in small type is clearly the legal compiler&apos;s. He here gets an opportunity for exercising his peculiar delight in legal antiquarianisms, and he has dealt with the incident in a lengthy but rather crabbed paraphrase. The contrast in diction is manifest; the interpolation is pedantic, obscure, and ill at ease.

<p>We can nearly date the compilation of the present Niala. None of the MSS. go back beyond say the last ten years of the 13th century. The genealogies speak of Sturlungs, Oddaverjar, and of Kolban the <pb id=pb364 n=364>Young (died 1245). The compiler of it may be put in the third quarter of the same century, at a time when the Commonwealth was dead. During the throes of the civil feuds perhaps no Fifth Court was ever held. At the end of that time of strife Norwegian laws were drifting in, when the older laws and customs were therefore beginning to be of antiquarian interest. He seems to have possessed not only an old book of genealogies, which he uses largely (what he gives being printed above, Bk. I. § 2), but also a scroll or scrolls on Procedure, which he has, so to speak, dramatized, filling up blanks from his own imagination or modern practice.

<p>In 1884 the editor took five transcripts of this chapter, viz. AM. 468, 132, K, G, and AM. 162 fragm., consisting of twenty-four leaves [for the notation, see Introd. to Bk. I. § 2]. In this case K seems to be the best; hence we have followed it, only there is a blank down to the words &lsquo;goðorz lôsom manne;&rsquo; that beginning is taken from AM. 132. K, or the Book of Calfbeck in the west of Iceland (Mýrar), was once a most beautiful vellum (soft parchment, broad margins, fine illuminations); in the 17th century it has been ruthlessly cut up, and maltreated by knife and damp and rot. A copy of John Halldorsson&apos;s&mdash;the later historian&mdash;was taken in 1697; he filled in the lacunas from a transcript of John Erlendsson&apos;s. This copy, in his neat handwriting, is now AM. 464.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 lang=is rend="toc-head(Islandic text) align-with(en.setup)" id=setup>


<p n=1><anchor id=a364.1>Nú es þar til máls at taka, at Niáll kom at mále við H&aolig;scolld: <anchor id=a364.2>&lsquo;Ráðs vilda ek þer leita, fóstre mínn, at afla þer kono.&rsquo; H&aolig;scolldr <anchor id=a364.3>bað hann fyrer ráða, ok spurðe hvar hann munde hellzt á leita. <anchor id=a364.4>&lsquo;Kona heiter Hildigunnr,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;ok es Starkaðar dótter, <anchor id=a364.5>Þórðar sonar Freys-goða; veit-ek þann kost beztan,&rsquo; seger hann.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a364.6>H&aolig;scolldr mælte: &lsquo;Siá þú fyrer, fóstre; þat scal mítt ráð sem þú <anchor id=a364.7>vill vera taka.&rsquo; &lsquo;Her muno vit á leita<note place=apparatus id=an364.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>leita]</ab> líta, 132.</note>,&rsquo; seger Niáll.

<p n=2><anchor id=a364.8>Efter þat kveðr Niáll menn til ferðar með ser, fóro þeir Sigfúss <anchor id=a364.9>syner, ok syner Niáls aller, ok Káre Solmundar son. Þeir <anchor id=a364.10>ríða austr til Svína-fellz, ok fá þar góðar viðt&aolig;kor. Ok um<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a365.1><pb id=pb365 n=365>dagenn efter ganga þeir Niáll ok Flose á tal, ok þar koma niðr <anchor id=a365.2>r&oeacute;ðor Niáls, at hann mælte. &lsquo;Þat er eyrende mítt hingat, es ver <anchor id=a365.3>f&aolig;rom bónorz f&aolig;r ok mælom til mægða við þik, Flose, en til <anchor id=a365.4>eigin-orz við Hildigunne broðor-dóttor þína.&rsquo; &lsquo;Fyrer hvers <anchor id=a365.5>h&aolig;nd?&rsquo; seger Flose. &lsquo;Fyrer h&aolig;nd H&aolig;scollz Þráens sonar fóstra<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a365.6>mins,&rsquo; seger Niáll. &lsquo;Vel es slíkt stofnat,&rsquo; seger Flose; &lsquo;en þó <anchor id=a365.7>hafeð ér miket<note place=apparatus id=an365.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> hætto-mikit, 464.</note> í hætto hvárer við aðra&mdash;eða hvat seger þú frá <anchor id=a365.8>H&aolig;scollde.&rsquo; &lsquo;Gótt má segja frá hónom,&rsquo; seger Niáll; &lsquo;ok skal <anchor id=a365.9>ek svá fé til leggja, at yðr þycki s&oeacute;milega, ef ér vilið þetta mál at <anchor id=a365.10>á-litom g&oelig;ra.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Kalla muno vit á hána,&rsquo; seger Flose, &lsquo;ok vita<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a365.11>hverso henne lítezk maðr.&rsquo; Þá vas kallað á hána, ok hon kom <anchor id=a365.12>þagat. Flose seger henne bónorðet. Hon kvez vesa kona skap-stór, <anchor id=a365.13>&lsquo;ok veit-ek eige hverso mer er hent, við þat at þar ero mein<note place=apparatus id=an365.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mein]</ab> emend.; &lsquo;m<hi rend=sup>n</hi>&rsquo; or &lsquo;&mnmacr;,&rsquo; Cdd.</note> <anchor id=a365.14>svá fyrer: en þat þó eige síðr at siá maðr hefer ecke manna-forráð; <anchor id=a365.15>en þú hefer þat mælt, at þú munder eige gifta mik goðorz-lausom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a365.16>manne.&rsquo; &lsquo;Þat er &oeacute;ret eitt til,&rsquo; seger Flose, &lsquo;ef þú vill <anchor id=a365.17>eige giftaz H&aolig;scollde at ek man &oelig;ngan á g&oelig;ra kostenn.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Þat <anchor id=a365.18>mælta-(ek)eige,&rsquo; seger hon, &lsquo;at ek vilja eige giftask H&aolig;scollde, ef <anchor id=a365.19>ér fáet hónom manna forráð, en ella mun-ek engan kost á g&oelig;ra.&rsquo;&mdash;Niáll <anchor id=a365.20>mælte: &lsquo;Þá vil-ek láta bíða mín um þetta mál þriá vetr.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a365.21>Flose seger svá vesa skolo. &lsquo;Þann hlut vil-ek til skilja,&rsquo; seger <anchor id=a365.22>Hildigunnr, &lsquo;ef þesse r&aoacute;ð takask, at vit sém austr her.&rsquo; Niáll kvazk <anchor id=a366.1><pb id=pb366 n=366>þat vilja skilja under H&aolig;skolld. Hoskollor lézk m&aolig;rgom vel trua, <anchor id=a366.2>en &aolig;ngom betr an fóstra sínom.&mdash;Nú ríða þeir austan.

<p n=3><anchor id=a366.3>Ok leitar Niáll H&aolig;skollde um manna-forráð, ok vilde einge selja <anchor id=a366.4>sítt goðorð. Líðr nú sumaret til Alþingess. Þat sumar vóro <anchor id=a366.5>þing-deilor miklar; g&oelig;ra þá marger sem vaner vóro at fara<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a366.6>til fundar við Niál; en hann lagðe þat til mála manna sem ecki <anchor id=a366.7>þótte líkligt, at eyddesk<note place=apparatus id=an366.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eyddesk]</ab> thus also fragm. 162.</note> sókner ok svá varner<note place=apparatus id=an366.2><ab type=textRef>ok svá varner]</ab> om. Cd.</note>, ok varð af því þræta <anchor id=a366.8>mikel, es málen m&aoacute;tto eige lúkask, ok riðo menn heim af þinge <anchor id=a366.9>ó-sátter.

<p n=4><anchor id=a366.10>Líðr nú þar til es k&oelig;mr annat þing. Niáll reið til þings, ok vas<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a366.11>fyrst kyrt þinget allt þar til es Niáll talaðe til at m&aolig;nnom være <anchor id=a366.12>mál at lýsa s&aolig;kom sínom. Marger mælto, at til lítils þ&oeacute;tte<note place=apparatus id=an366.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> þ&apos;te, Cd.; þótti, fragm.</note> þat <anchor id=a366.13>koma, ef einge maðr k&oeacute;me síno mále framm þótt til Alþingess <anchor id=a366.14>være stefnt,&mdash;&lsquo;ok viljo ver heldr,&rsquo; segja þeir, &lsquo;heimta með <anchor id=a366.15>odde ok eggjo.&rsquo; &lsquo;Svá má eige vesa,&rsquo; seger Niáll, &lsquo;ok hlýðer þat<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a366.16>hverge, at hafa eige l&aolig;g í lande; en þó hafeð ér mikit til yðvars <anchor id=a366.17>máls, ok k&oelig;mr þat til vár es l&aolig;gonom skolom<note place=apparatus id=an366.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> skolldim, Cd.</note> stýra, at sætta <anchor id=a366.18>mennena ok efla friðenn; þycke mer ráð at ver kallemk saman <anchor id=a366.19>aller h&aolig;fðingjarner ok talem her til.&rsquo; Þeir gengo þá til l&aolig;gretto, <anchor id=a366.20>Niáll mælte: &lsquo;Þik kveð-ek at þesso, Skafte Þórodz son, ok aðra<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a366.21>h&aolig;fðingja, at mer þicker sem m&aoacute;lom órom sé komet í ónýtt efne, ef <anchor id=a366.22>var skolom s&oeacute;kja m&aoacute;l í fiórðungs-dómom, ok verðe svá vafet at eige <anchor id=a367.1><pb id=pb367 n=367>mege lúkask né framm ganga. Þycke mer þat ráðligra, at ver ættem <anchor id=a367.2>enn fimta dóm<note place=apparatus id=an367.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> enn fimtar dóm, fragm.; fimtar dóm, Cd.</note>, ok s&oelig;ktem þar þau m&aoacute;l í fimtar-dóme er eige mego <anchor id=a367.3>lúkask í fiórðungs dómom.&rsquo; [<hi>a.</hi> ...]<note place=apparatus id=an367.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> See note <hi>a</hi>.</note> Efter þat leidde Skafte Þóroddz <anchor id=a367.4>son í l&aolig;g fimtar-dóm. [<hi>b.</hi> ...]<note place=apparatus id=an367.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> See note <hi>b</hi>.</note> Síðan gengo menn til L&aolig;gbergs: <anchor id=a367.5>tóko menn þá upp ný goðorð. [<hi>c.</hi> ...]<note place=apparatus id=an367.4><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> See note <hi>c</hi>.</note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=5><anchor id=a367.6>Þá kvadde Niáll ser hlióðs, ok mælte: &lsquo;Þat er m&aolig;nnom kunnegt <anchor id=a367.7>hverso fór með sonom mínom ok Griótár-m&aolig;nnom, at þeir <anchor id=a367.8>dr&aoacute;po Þráen Sigfús son. En síðan sættomk ver á málet, ok hefe-ek <anchor id=a367.9>teket nú við H&aolig;scollde, ok ráðet hónom kván-fang, ef hann fær <anchor id=a367.10>goðorð nockot: en einge vill selja sítt goðorð. Vil-ek nú biðja<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a367.11>yðr, at ér lofet mer at taka upp nýtt goðorð á Hvíta-nese<note place=apparatus id=an367.5><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á Hvíta-nese]</ab> om. Cd.</note> til handa <anchor id=a367.12>H&aolig;scollde.&rsquo; Hann feck þat af &aolig;llom. Tók Niáll þá upp goðorð til <anchor id=a367.13>handa H&aolig;scollde; ok var hann kallaðr síðan H&aolig;scolldr Hvítaness-goðe. <anchor id=a367.14>Efter þat riðo menn heim af þinge.

<p n=6><anchor id=a367.15>Niáll dvalðesk skamma stund heima, áðr hann ríðr austr til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a367.16>Svína-fellz, ok syner hans, ok vekr til um bónorð við Flosa; <anchor id=a367.17>en hann lézk efna munda við þá &aolig;ll m&aoacute;l. Vas þá Hildigunn f&aolig;stnoð <anchor id=a367.18>H&aolig;scollde, ok á kveðen brullaups-stefna, ok lýkr svá með þeim. Ríða <anchor id=a367.19>þeir þá heim; en í annat sinne ríða þeir til brúðhlaups: leyste <anchor id=a367.20>Flose þá út fé hennar efter boðet, ok greidde vel af hende. Fara þau<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a367.21>þá til Bergþórs-hváls ok vóro þar þau missere: ok fór allt vel með <anchor id=a367.22>þeim Hildigunne ok Bergþóro.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<!-- TRANSLATION OF NIAL AND THE FIFTH COURT STARTS HERE -->


<div2 lang=en-UK id=en.setup rend="display(none)">
<head><hi>How the Fifth Court was set up.</hi></head>

<p n=1>Now the tale is to be taken up where Nial was talking to Haus-coll. &lsquo;I would fain seek a match for thee, my foster-son, and get thee a wife.&rsquo; Haus-coll bade him order the matter, and asked whither he meant first to seek. Nial said, &lsquo;There is a woman named Hilde-gund, and she is the daughter of Stark-ad the son of Thord, Frey&apos;s priest. That is the best match that I know.&rsquo; Haus-coll said, &lsquo;Do thou see to it, foster-father. What thou wouldest have shall be my will.&rsquo; &lsquo;We two will try her then,&rsquo; says Nial.

<p n=2>After this Nial calls men to go a journey with him. There went the Sigfus&apos;s sons, and all Nial&apos;s sons, and Care Sol-mund&apos;s son. They rode <pb id=pb365a n=365>east to Swine-fell, and got a good welcome there. The next day Nial and Flose fell into talk, and the end of Nial&apos;s talk was this that he spake thus. &lsquo;This is my errand hither. We are come as suitors, and we want to wed into thy family, Flose, and sue for Hilde-gund thy niece.&rsquo; &lsquo;On whose behalf?&rsquo; says Flose. &lsquo;On behalf of Haus-coll Thrainson, my foster-son,&rsquo; says Nial. &lsquo;Such a suit is very reasonable,&rsquo; says Flose; &lsquo;but yet ye stand in no little jeopardy towards each other [<hi>alluding to the blood-feud between Nial&apos;s sons and Haus-coll</hi>]. But what sayest thou for Haus-coll?&rsquo; &lsquo;I can speak well of him,&rsquo; says Nial, &lsquo;and I will settle such a sum on his behalf as ye shall consider honourable, if ye will take thought over this case.&rsquo; &lsquo;Let us call the lady,&rsquo; says Flose, &lsquo;and find out how she likes the man.&rsquo; Then Hilde-gund was called, and she came where they were. Flose told her of the offer of marriage. She said that she was a proud woman. &lsquo;And I do not know how it will suit me, seeing that there are such impediments in the way [the blood-guilt]; and there is this, too, not the least, that this man hath no chieftainship, and thou hast told me that thou wouldest not marry me to a man that had not a chieftainship.&rsquo; &lsquo;That alone is enough,&rsquo; says Flose, &lsquo;if thou dost not wish to be married to Haus-coll, then I will take no thought over it.&rsquo; &lsquo;I do not say,&rsquo; says she, &lsquo;that I do not wish to be married to Haus-coll, if ye can get him a chieftainship; but if not I will take no thought over it.&rsquo; Nial spoke: &lsquo;Now I will ask you to let this suit stand over for three winters [years].&rsquo; Flose said that it should be so. Hilde-gund said, &lsquo;I will lay this condition upon you, if this bargain is to stand, that we shall live here in the east.&rsquo; Nial said that Haus-coll must settle that. <pb id=pb366a n=366>But Haus-coll said that he trusted many men well, but none so well as his foster-father. Now they rode home from the east.

<p n=3>Nial sought for a chieftainship for Haus-coll, but no man was willing to sell his gode-hood. The year was on till the All-moot. That summer there were many matters at issue at the moot, and many men came to seek Nial as they were wont, but he gave such counsel on men&apos;s cases as was not thought the most promising, and the suits were quashed and the defences also, and there arose great murmuring <hi>or</hi> discord because men&apos;s cases were not finished, and men rode home with their quarrels open from the moot.

<p n=4>Now the year wears on till the next moot. Nial rode to the moot, and at first there was no stir at the moot, till Nial said that it was time for men to give notice of their suits. But many men said that they thought it of little use, for no man&apos;s suit could get forward though it were set for hearing at the All-moot, &lsquo;and we are rather minded,&rsquo; said they, &lsquo;to seek our rights by point and edge!&rsquo; &lsquo;That may not be,&rsquo; says Nial, &lsquo;and it would never do not to have law in the land; nevertheless ye have much matter of complaint in this, but <hi>to find a remedy</hi> this touches us that must steer the law and set men at peace. It seemeth best to me that we, the chieftains, should come together.&rsquo;

<p>Then they went to the Court of Laws, and Nial spake: &lsquo;I call on thee on this head, Shafto Thoroddsson and other chieftains, for me-thinketh that our cases are in a poor way, if we are to carry our suits to the Quarter-courts and there be such quibbling then that none can end <pb id=pb367a n=367>or get on. I think this would be the best, that we should set up a Fifth Court, and follow up those suits in the Fifth Court that cannot be brought to an end in the Quarter-courts.&rsquo; [<hi>Passage made up and interpolated by latest editor follows.</hi>] After that Shafto brought forward and carried the Fifth Court.... Then men went to the hill of laws, then men took up new gode-hoods.... Then Nial called for silence, and spake: &lsquo;It is known now to many men how matters went between my sons and the men of Grit-water; how they slew Thrain Sigfus&apos;s son; nevertheless we are set at peace over that suit, and I have now fostered Haus-coll, and got him a wife if only he can get a gode-hood, but no man will sell him his gode-hood, wherefore I will pray you now to give me leave to take up a new gode-hood at White-ness on Haus-coll&apos;s behalf.&rsquo; And he got leave of all so to do. Then Nial took up the chieftainship on Haus-coll&apos;s behalf, and he was called ever after Haus-coll the White-ness priest. After that men rode home from the moot.

<p n=6>Nial dwelt a short while at home before he rode eastward to Swine-fell, he and his sons, and mooted the suit to Flose. Flose said he would fulfil all his engagements, and Hilde-gund was then betrothed to Haus-coll, and the bridal was fixed, and so they parted. Then they rode home; and they went thither a second time to the bridal. At the close of the feast Flose gave up her portion <hi>or</hi> endowed her out of his own possessions, paying all liberally. Hilde-gund and Haus-coll came home to Berg-thor&apos;s knoll, and were there a season, and all went well between Hilde-gund and Berg-thora.


<!-- TRANSLATION ENDS HERE -->

</div2>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<pb id=pb368 n=368>
<div2 lang=is>
<head lang=en-UK><hi>The Interpolation.</hi></head>

<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<p><anchor id=a368.1><ab type=parNum><hi>a.</hi></ab> <note place=apparatus id=an368.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Fragm. here reads&mdash;Scalltu Scapte | s. N. (sic) nefna fimtar dóminn er f&apos; forn goð | orð er nefndr fiórðungs dómr, f<hi rend=sup>s</hi>rnar | f<hi rend=sup>s</hi>rnar [thus bis] tylfter í fiórðunge hverjum. Sia mon | ek ok rað til þess s. N. at taka upp ný | etc. fyrer] f&apos; for&apos;, Cd.</note>&lsquo;Skaltú,&rsquo; seger Skapte, &lsquo;nefna fimtar-dómenn er fyrer forn goðorð er nefndr <anchor id=a368.2>fiórðungs-dómr, þrennar<note place=apparatus id=an368.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þrennar]</ab> ok þrennar, fragm.</note> tylfter í fiórðunge hverjum?&rsquo; &lsquo;Siá mun ek ráð till þess,&rsquo; <anchor id=a368.3>seger Niáll, &lsquo;at taka upp<note place=apparatus id=an368.3><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at t. upp]</ab> taka upp, fragm.</note> ný goðorð, þeir er bezt ero til fallner or fiórðunge hverjom, <anchor id=a368.4>ok segez í þing með þeim er þat vilja sam-þyckja.&rsquo; &lsquo;Þenna kost viljom ver,&rsquo; <anchor id=a368.5>seger Skapte: &lsquo;eða hverso vandar sókner skulo her í koma?&rsquo; &lsquo;Þau mál skulu<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a368.6>her í koma,&rsquo; seger Niáll, &lsquo;um alla þings-afglöpun, ef menn bera liúg-vitne eða liúg-kviðu; <anchor id=a368.7>her skolu ok í koma véfangs mál oll þau er menn véfengja í fiórðungs-dóme, <anchor id=a368.8>ok skal þeim stefna til fimtar-dóms: svá ok, ef menn bióða eða taka fé til <anchor id=a368.9>liðs ser; ok inni-hafner þræla eða skyldar-manna<note place=apparatus id=an368.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok inni-h. ... sk.-manna]</ab> om. Cd.</note>. Í þessum dóme skulo vera aller <anchor id=a368.10>ener sterkosto eiðar, ok fylgja ij<note place=apparatus id=an368.5><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ij]</ab> ok skal fylgja hverjum eiði, er þat skal á leggja ... , Cd.</note> hverjum eiði, er þat skolo leggja under þegn-skap<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a368.11>sínn er hiner sverja: Svá skal ok, ef annarr ferr með rétt mál en annarr með rangt, <anchor id=a368.12>þá skal efter þeim d&oeacute;ma et rétt ferr at sókn. Her (skal) ok s&oeacute;kja hvert mál sem í <anchor id=a368.13>fiórðungs-dóme, útan þat þá er nefndar ero fernar tylfter í Fimtar-dóm, þá skal <anchor id=a368.14>sækjande nefna<note place=apparatus id=an368.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> nefnder (sic), Cd.</note> sex menn or dóme, en verjande aðra sex; en ef hann vill eige or <anchor id=a368.15>nefna þá skal sækjande þá or nefna sem hina. En ef sækjande nefner eige or, þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a368.16>er ónýtt málet, þvi at þrennar tylfter skolu um d&oeacute;ma.

<p><anchor id=a368.17>Ver skolom ok hafa þá l&aolig;grétto-skipan, at þeir skolo rétter at ráða fyrer <anchor id=a368.18>lofom ok logom<note place=apparatus id=an368.7><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> lovom, Cd.</note> er sitja á mið-pollom, ok skal þá velja til þess er vitrazter ero ok <anchor id=a368.19>bezt at ser, ok þar skal ok vera fimtar-dómr. En ef þeir verða eige á-sátter er í <anchor id=a368.20>logréttu sitja, hvat þeir vitja lofa eðr í log leiða, þá skolo þeir ryðja logréttu til, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a368.21>skal ráða afl með þeim. En ef nockurr er sá fyr útan logréttu, er eige nái inn at <anchor id=a368.22>ganga, eða þykiz borenn vera mále, þá skal hann verja lýriti svá at heyre í logréttu, <anchor id=a368.23>ok hefer hann þá ónýtt fyrer þeim oll log<note place=apparatus id=an368.8><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>log]</ab> lof, fragm.</note> þeirra, ok allt þat er þeir mæla til log-skila; <anchor id=a368.24>ok varðe lýriti.

<p><anchor id=a368.25><ab type=parNum><hi>b.</hi></ab> Ok allt þat er nú var talat.<ab type=lineNum>25</ab>

<p><anchor id=a368.26><ab type=parNum><hi>c.</hi></ab> Tóko menn þá upp ný goðorð. Í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge vóro þesse ný <anchor id=a368.27>goðorð: Melmanna-goðorð í Miðfirðe,&mdash;þat tók upp Oddr Úfeigs son.&mdash;Laufæsinga <anchor id=a368.28>goðorð í Eyjafirðe. [See p. 329.]


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<pb id=pb369 n=369>
<div0 id=bk3 n=III type=Book>
<head type=label>BOOK III.</head>

<head>CONVERSION AND EARLY CHURCH OF ICELAND.</head>


<p>The nucleus of facts on this head lies in Landnama-book and Libellus, the former supplying many notices of Christian settlers, both Irish and Scandinavian, before the various missions and the legal conversion of the island at the All-moot in 1000 or 1001. But for a completer account of the foundation of the Church of Iceland the authorities must be sought in the following sections.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 1</hi> includes <hi>Christne Saga</hi>, or the History of Christendom in Iceland, a counterpart to Are&apos;s account, which is, in its present 13th-century form, a complex mass of materials of various age and style. It is followed here by a work which, from parts of it being mixed up with Christne Saga, and from its connection with Gunlaug, cannot be separated from it, viz. the <hi>History of Thorvald the Traveller</hi>.

<p>In <hi rend=sc>Section 2</hi> are <hi>Early Church Legends in Iceland</hi> before the missions, Latinized and afterwards rendered into the vernacular.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 3</hi> contains the <hi>Biographies of the first seven Bishops of Scalholt</hi> (fl. 1056&ndash;1211), in three works, <hi>Hunger-waker</hi> or <hi>Hunger-whet</hi> (the first five Bishops&apos; Lives) (1056&ndash;1176); the <hi>Life of Bishop Thorlac</hi>, the national Saint (1178&ndash;1193); the <hi>Life of Bishop Paul</hi> (1195&ndash;1211). Hunger-waker and Paul&apos;s Life being at least by the same author.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 4.</hi> The <hi>Life of S. John, Bishop of Holar</hi> (1106&ndash;1121), by a contemporary of the author of Hunger-waker.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 5.</hi> The <hi>Second Life of S. Thorlac</hi>, written c. 1250, much concerned with the glebe question, which was too delicate a subject for the Hunger-waker author to dwell upon.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 6.</hi> A fragment of a translation of a lost Latin <hi>Life of S. John of Holar</hi>, by Gunlaug, d. 1219.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 7.</hi> <hi>Biographica Minora</hi>, or sundry supplementary pieces of Saga-type touching Gizor, Islaf, Magnus, and Cetil, together with the drastic narrative of the election of Bishop Godmund.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 8.</hi> Early Ecclesiastical legislation from the <hi>Tithe Law</hi> of Bishop Gizor and the <hi>Christian Law</hi> of Bishops Thorlac and Cetil.

<p><hi rend=sc>Section 9.</hi> The earlier and more typical Icelandic Charters of Church Endowment.





<pb id=pb370 n=370>
<div1 id=s3.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 1.</ab> CHRISTNE SAGA</head>

<head type=sub>THE STORY OF THE CONVERSION OF ICELAND.</head>


<p>This work is, upon the very face of it, a composite work of divers parts and origins. The main and most noteworthy constituent (&alpha;) is a history of the eventful years 999&ndash;1001, in which the conversion of the land was effected. The history of these notable years has come down to us in a <hi>double</hi> form,&mdash;(1) that of Libellus, ch. 7, and (2) the narrative in our Saga, the respective heroes of which are Gizor and Healte <hi>or</hi> Sholto. Of the first, that of Gizor, we can easily account for the preservation&mdash;it is derived from his son bishop Islaf and his grandson and namesake bishop Gizor, the law-maker and statesman, whose brother Tait was the foster-father of Are the historian. This version we may call the <hi>Arean</hi>, <hi>Official</hi>, <hi>Scalholtine</hi> one. It is <hi>political</hi> in tone, though it reaches us through such ecclesiastical sources, and is valuable as preserving for us the <hi>legal</hi> aspect of the change of faith. The other or <hi>local Southern</hi> account would naturally come to us from Sholto&apos;s own family. This version is wholly different in style from the other. There is something of Bæda in its tone&mdash;cheerful, pious, gentle, and firm. Sholto was a native of the Steer-water county in the South, of mixed Norse and Celtic (Un-Norse) descent, lineally descended, like bishop S. Thorlac, from a Cetil (here representing Gael. Cathal) the One-handed; descended also from a settler Lunan (Irish): Sholto&apos;s very name is expressive of this descent, meaning Shetlander or <hi>Shelty</hi>, and (if we be right) the <hi>Caledonian</hi>. His only daughter became the great-grandmother to Magnus, the fourth bishop of Scalholt (d. 1148). Sholto was Gizor&apos;s son-in-law by Gizor&apos;s first wife.

<p>The life and character of this type of Norse-Celts, such as Sholto, Nial, S. Thorlac, S. John of Holar, Stephen, and Ceartan, are worth studying. Sholto himself was witty, full of resource, kindly, and upright of life, unspotted from the world in which he moved, loving and beloved&mdash;a beautiful individual character, and unlike any of the numerous and varied heroic types Icelandic literature has drawn for us. Sholto&apos;s bright and ready speech at the Moot, his three epigrammatic verses, his declaration that Christian sacrifice means devotion to a holy life, his pardoning and serving his would-be assassin, the skill in the management of a great cause so well shown by his whole policy, and the fact that he was chosen by S. Olaf to assist the king in mending the church laws of Iceland (O. H. 1853, ch. 46) and again for an embassage on which no slight import was attached, are among the instances that illustrate his personalty and qualities.

<p>The somewhat cold and legal aspect in which Are presents the conversion has led writers to think the change of faith in Iceland a <pb id=pb371 n=371>mere political expedient; but the warm and sympathetic narrative that centres about Sholto speaks loudly and conclusively against this view (which indeed is, <hi>à priori</hi>, untenable). It is a pity that we have but this headless, tailless piece of a lost Sholto&apos;s Saga. Sholto enters and makes his exit with a ditty on his lips; the mocking chaunt on the Law-hill ushers him in, as it were, and with the laughing taunt at his old enemy as he fills his mouth with the baptismal salt he vanishes from us. The whole must have been a delightful story. As it is, the fragment gives colour and fragrance to the heterogeneous medley now known as Christne Saga. As to its author or authors, its date, or original MSS., we know but little.

<p>It is curious to place side by side the account in Libell. ch. vii. and Christne S. chs. 6&ndash;8. In the former, as in those who draw on Are (e. g. Hunger-waker, Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Saga, Eyrbyggia, ch. 49), Gizor is the chief man; &lsquo;þeir Gizorr&rsquo; is Are&apos;s recurring phrase. In the other Sholto is the leader, Gizor the second; and &lsquo;þeir Healte&rsquo; is the standing phrase; sometimes &lsquo;þeir H. <hi>and</hi> G.,&rsquo; where Gizor is superabundant, and a gloss is apparent. That here, and not in Are&apos;s record, we have the true statement of the case, is proven by the two crosses, one of which marked the king&apos;s height, one (note this!) Sholto&apos;s, <hi>not</hi> Gizor&apos;s. It is Sholto who speaks at the Law-hill, and so it is in conformance with this, that some sixteen years later, S. Olave summons Sholto and the Speaker Shafto as being the two foremost, wisest, and best men of Iceland<note n=1 id=n371.1>I mark that this has been noticed once, and only once, before, viz. by M. Jörgensen, of Copenhagen, in his History of the Ancient Church of Denmark, p. 378, a work full of sagacity and genuine first-hand learning.</note>.

<p>As it stands now in Christne Saga, this Southern version is larded with a few stray glosses and morsels out of Libellus (Libell. ch. vii). We have not eliminated them, as it would make the narrative rather broken and clumsy. The last chapter (<hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 2&ndash;7, 9) is drawn almost entirely from the two last chapters of Libellus. This section is headed by the words, &lsquo;This is the record of Are the Old,&rsquo; which we now see refers to what <hi>follows</hi>, not to the preceding or to the whole work. It looks as if our editor had had before him a copy (or part of a copy) of Libellus of the end of the 12th century, when Are the Young (the historian&apos;s grandson) was still alive. Are&apos;s also would be the <hi>Lists of Chiefs</hi>, and a long quotation which now closes the Saga (chs. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 2 and <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 8, 10).

<p>The third constituent of Christne Saga (&beta;) is the <hi>Thangbrand and Hall</hi> piece, which, though it breathes something of the spirit of the Sholto piece, is yet of separate origin. That it is no part or parcel of the Sholto piece is proved by the fact that the compiler of the story in Niala, though he largely uses the Thangbrand section, yet shows no marks of cognizance of the Sholto section. Yet the story is, we believe, of Southern origin also.

<p>The fourth constituent (&gamma;) is the account of the Christianity of the North-West country, especially about the Neck. Who is the author?

<pb id=pb372 n=372><p>The Christne Saga editor, though his work is chequered enough, gives but two names, <hi>Are</hi> and <hi>Brand the Far-traveller</hi>, citing a verse of his on Thorwald Wide-traveller. On the other hand, Landnama-book (II. <hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1) names a Brand <hi>Frode</hi>, a <hi>prior</hi>, as having written the Genealogies of the Borg-frithers<note n=1 id=n372.1>The passage (from Styrme&apos;s book?) is only found in Hawk&apos;s-book, &lsquo;breið&rsquo; miswritten for &lsquo;borg.&rsquo; There is no space for a Broad-frith writer, where all is uniform, and points to Are as the sole chronicler; while Borg-frith contains chequered details, and Brand was, as we see, a native of that county.</note>. We think both refer to the <hi>same</hi> person: the Brand of the Genealogies was the sixth lineal descendant of the chief settler in Upper Borg-frith (as was Are in Broad-frith his county), hence his life would fall in the early 12th century. The name Frode marks Brand as a compeer of Are, Sæmund, Colsceg. Again, the verse in our Saga points to a writer of the early 12th century; both names agree; both write on the same subject, for the verse treats of a sainted Borg-frith man whose grave on the Dnieper the poet had visited. Hence we infer that the two Brands are identical. The genealogical work (and poem), we take it, treated of Borg-frith worthies, and was a history of Borg-frith families in a wider sense (Ld. I. <hi rend=bold>7</hi> sqq. and beginning of Bk. II. Ld. II. <hi rend=bold>2</hi>, treats of Brand&apos;s own ancestors). Here were related the records of old Christianity in Borg-frith, of Ans-wolf, of the Bishops in By; and, lastly, the story of Thorwald, which, in the first instance, is due, we hold, to Brand.

<p>Another name of a writer treading the same field,&mdash;<hi>Gunlaug</hi>, the Benedictine, of Thing-eyre,&mdash;is not mentioned in our Saga, but thrice cited in the Thorwald Appendix to it, and in the Church Legends of the North (p. 411 twice, 414 once): he was a noted ecclesiastic and Latinist, died in 1219 at a high age, for he mentions a man who died in 1148 as dying &lsquo;within his life-time&rsquo; (see § 6). His birth and Brand&apos;s death (year unknown) would thus well-nigh coincide. He, we take it, endited in Latin some of Brand&apos;s records, adding local and personal notices of his own. His Latin work is lost, but what remains has come down to us in a 14th-century translation or paraphrase. It is to these two we owe our knowledge of bishop Frederick and Thorwald.

<p>By way of summing up&mdash;

<list>
    <item>&alpha;. The Sholto Section = Chs. <hi rend=bold>6&ndash;8</hi>.
    <item>&beta;. The Thangbrand Section = Chs. <hi rend=bold>3&ndash;5</hi>.
    <item>&gamma;. The Brand Section = Chs. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1, 3&ndash;5; <hi rend=bold>2</hi> and <hi rend=bold>9</hi> and <hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 5.
    <item>&delta;. The Libellus Section = Ch. <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 2&ndash;7, 9, etc.
    <item>&epsilon;. Other works of Are = Chs. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 2; <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 8, 10.
</list>

<p>Who could have put this four <hi>or</hi> fivefold compound together? On this head we have but scant means of judgment. It is a mechanical piece of work which the unknown editor has performed. He has skilfully managed to make out from his sundry authorities a consecutive narrative, but he has luckily not taken much pains to alter or unify the pieces of his patch-work. Hence, though the whole impression of the work is spoilt by its piebald appearance, yet we can easily make out the <pb id=pb373 n=373>different styles of the originals upon which he drew. Ancient editors, like architects of old, had no sense of incongruity, and were content, so the whole edifice fulfilled its purpose, to let each different part of the building stand in individuality, without endeavouring to secure factitious unity by elaborate falsification.

<p>Was it Hawk (from whose MS. the fullest and the unique text is taken) that compiled this work? It is not impossible; but on the whole we think not. He would most likely have told us something of his own share in the book (as he does in Landnama-book), like the conscientious scribe he was. We should expect to find some such statement as &lsquo;I have put this book together out of the writings of Brand, Are,&rsquo; etc. etc. Again, the remark (ch. <hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 3 at the end) as to the church of Ridge, still existing when bishop Botolf was at Holar (which, however, may be a gloss on Gunlaug&apos;s scroll), looks like the words of the editor, writing between 1238&ndash;1246. The mechanical execution, at any rate, is late. The strange mention of Hugbert as archbishop of Canterbury in 993 (instead of 1193&ndash;1206), just two centuries wrong, would point to a later date than 1206.

<p>The text rests upon one vellum&mdash;the <hi>Hawk&apos;s-book</hi> (of c. 1310)&mdash;wherein it follows next after Landnama-book. Four leaves are still left of Christne Saga, whereof one has been clipped and pared at margin and top. A copy of Hawk&apos;s-book by John Erlendsson, c. 1650, is preserved in AM. 105 (see Introd. to Landnama). It supplies the portions now missing, though even in John&apos;s day Hawk&apos;s-book was imperfect, a leaf of <hi>Mantissa</hi>, which follows Christne Saga, being gone. See the Introduction to <hi>Mantissa</hi> (p. 266). We have marked the codex A and Cod.

<p>There are, however, other means of helping out the A-text, which is not quite perfect, the scribe having hurried over some lines and phrases. Besides, the editor has at times compressed, and even left out whole episodes, which we are able to recover in what we call the B&ast;-text. Thus, either a fuller and better text is preserved in B&ast;, ch. <hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 5, 6; ch. <hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 4; ch. <hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 4; ch. <hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 2; or a double text is presented in ch. <hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 2, final clause; and so on, see the foot-notes.

<p>It will be seen, that it is always the separate components we find cited, never the whole complex Saga as we find it in Hawk&apos;s-book.

<p>The great Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Saga (as in AM. 61 and Flatey-book) includes an episode of the Conversion, the compiler knows the Thangbrand, Sholto, and Gunlaug sections, but does not exactly coincide with Hawk&apos;s texts, making much poorer use of the Sholto section;&mdash;great part, if not the whole, must have been first amplified and endited in a Latin-Eccl. paraph&rmacr;ase (dict), and hence re-rendered into 14th-century Norse. We mark it B&ast;(O). That part of B&ast;(O) which centres about Ceartan and Tryggvason has also been through the hands of the compiler of Laxdæla Saga, who was probably one of the Sturlung school.

<p>Further: in Niala, chs. 101&ndash;104, the Thangbrand section is used, indeed is the main stock-in-trade the editor had to draw upon; here the good Thangbrand bit&mdash;the dialogue with Stan-wor or Stan-wen the <pb id=pb374 n=374>poetess&mdash;is preserved. The Niala compiler knows Are&apos;s Libellus, but does not use Gunlaug or Brand; indeed, the southern Thangbrand section is, next to a few incidents from Libellus, his <hi>sole</hi> authority; in general the style of his text is poor and thin. When using this text we mark it B&ast;(N).

<p>Next after our text we have printed what part of Thorwald Codransson&apos;s life, found in Flatey-book, AM. 61, and Berg-book, is not represented in Christne Saga. It supplies a few details.

<p>In further notice of monk Gunlaug, a word may be added here. The compilers of Flatey-book have mixed him up with Odd the monk as one of the authors of King Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Saga; but it can be proved that Odd, not Gunlaug, is to be credited with this work. The name of Gunlaug, in this connection, is due, we believe, solely to a misapprehension by John Thordsson the scribe (see Flatey-book, vol. i. pp. 511&ndash;519). Wherever Gunlaug is mentioned elsewhere, it is always in connection with early Christianity of his native county. The account of earlier missions of Thorwald and Frederick seems to rest partly on his authority and information, as do other local notices of early Christianity near Thing-eyre. It is not a bold hypothesis to conclude that Gunlaug endited in Latin some work from which most that is preserved relating to the noble and charming personality of Thorwald Codransson was taken by those who later edited Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Saga.

<p>Borgar-frith and the N.W. district about the Neck of Iceland would seem to have been a kind of centre of old Christian associations in Iceland. Many of the most prominent names of the early heroes and historians of the new faith occur in connection with it. No wonder that Brand and Gunlaug should be stirred to describe the conversion of this district, which was largely colonized with men of Irish blood, and distinguished by the presence of Answolf, Thorwald, and Frederick in early days, and later by the foundations of By and Thing-eyre. The little sketch-map marking the Church history of Iceland will show the importance of the district. Bishop Frederick&apos;s mission was probably a local mission to this very district, as the most hopeful and most open to the new influences it brought.

<p>The last chapter is in Hawk&apos;s-book all chequered and disorderly. A large patch of Libellus has been slipped into it (here printed in small type, pp. 404&ndash;6). Between §§ 9 and 10 there is a piece we have eliminated and rejoined with <hi>Mantissa</hi>, ch. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.

<p>The end of the work in the old editions is undoubtedly wrongly given, owing to the loss of the last vellum leaf when John Erlendsson made his copy. We have, by restoring to <hi>Mantissa</hi> its rightful chapter, now made clear the original ending, which was one of those summaries with which Are concludes his other works&mdash;a classified list of chiefs, just such as that in the end chapter of Landnama, another running series of chiefs at the different periods of the commonwealth.

<p>Several emendations have suggested themselves in the course of study and transcription. Amongst them are the insertion of the words &lsquo;en <pb id=pb375 n=375>sudr&rsquo; (p. 377, l. 7) before and not after the name of Illuge the Red, clearing up a difficulty which has caused much trouble.

<p>It has not been noticed before that the remark of Sholto (p. 403) to the old chief whose baptism he was witnessing, and also the address to his would-be assassin (p. 393), are <hi>verses</hi>.

<p>The ditty for which Sholto was outlawed is, as it stands in the text of the MS., unintelligible, for it runs &lsquo;munec eigi goð geyja,&rsquo; i.e. &lsquo;I will <hi>not</hi> the gods blaspheme,&rsquo; which forced the compiler of Niala to change the line to &lsquo;spare ec eigi,&rsquo; i.e. &lsquo;I will not spare the gods to blaspheme.&rsquo; The build of the verse and the parallelism show that we have only to mend &lsquo;eigi&rsquo; into some epithet of Woden, and the whole makes sense&mdash;e.g. read &lsquo;hauga-goð&rsquo; (&lsquo;hauga&rsquo; resembling &lsquo;eigi&rsquo; in sound), &lsquo;the grave-mound god,&rsquo; an epithet not actually found, but implied by phrases of Are&apos;s and Snorre&apos;s,&mdash;and the text runs &lsquo;mun-ec hauga-goð geyja,&rsquo; &lsquo;I will the grave-god blaspheme.&rsquo; &lsquo;Freya&rsquo; seems to be used in an early sense as &lsquo;lady;&rsquo; Woden and his Lady.

<p>It would seem from Sholto&apos;s three notable ditties that, like Sighwat, he could more easily speak in verse than prose when he was moved to wrath or mockery.

<p>Another emendation solves a riddle which long perplexed us. In the verse by Brand the Far-traveller, which bears all the marks of genuine early 12th-century poetry, the account of Thorwald&apos;s resting-place was puzzling, &lsquo;on a high cliff or hill in Drafn <hi>or</hi> Drapn in Russia,&rsquo; but by reading &lsquo;Dnapre&rsquo; for &lsquo;Drapne,&rsquo; by means of an easy metathesis of the consonants, a good explanation is afforded. The hill is the rocky Lavra of Kieff, the &lsquo;Dnapre&rsquo; is our &lsquo;Dnieper,&rsquo; which flows beneath the Hill of Holy Sepulchres and Shrines, which has been an immemorial place of pilgrimage, the one place in the East indeed, apart from Constantinople and Jerusalem, which a Scandinavian Christian of those days would care to visit. See Grimm Centenary Papers, Oxford, 1886.

<p>Stefne, the missionary, was, like Sholto, of Celto-Norse descent, being a great-grandson of the settler Beolan of Keelness. The name, we think, means <hi>Stephen</hi>, for the Icel. Annals call King Stephen &lsquo;Stefne.&rsquo; It would follow that Stefne had been in England and there been baptized. He, like Sholto, is remembered for his ditty, one on Earl Sigvald, which Odd, the monk, has rendered into Latin, thus&mdash;


<lg lang=la>
    <l>Nec nominabo,&mdash;pene monstrabo
    <l>Curuus est deorsum nasus in apostata&mdash;
    <l>Qui Svein regem de terrâ seduxit,
    <l>Et filium Trygva traxit in dolo.
</lg>


<p>The Stefne piece would belong to the Brand section.

<p>The pedigree at the beginning agrees with the Niala generations (p. 244), but not with those given in Ld. III. <hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 6.

<p>The title Christne Saga is probably, like the heads of chapters in Landnama, of Hawk&apos;s coinage. We keep it, as it is convenient in use.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<pb id=pb376 n=376>
<div2 lang=is rend="toc-head(Islandic Text) align-with(en.cristne)" id=cristne>

<p n=0.1><hi>Her hefr Cristne S&aolig;go</hi>.

<p n=0.2><anchor id=a376.1>Nú hefr þat Hverso Cristne kom á Ísland, at&mdash;

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a376.2><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Maðr hét Þórvaldr, Coðrans son, bróðor-son Atla <anchor id=a376.3>ens Ramma. Þeir vóro syner Eilífs Arnar, Bárðar <anchor id=a376.4>sonar or Ál, Ketils sonar Refs, Skíða sonar ens Gamla&mdash;Coðran <anchor id=a376.5>bió at Gilj-&aoacute; í Vatzdal, ok vas ágætr maðr. Þórvaldr son<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a376.6>hans fór útan, ok vas fyrst í hernaðe: en hlut-skifte þat es hann <anchor id=a376.7>feck, lagðe hann til útlausnar her-teknom m&aolig;nnom, allt þat es <anchor id=a376.8>hann þurfte eige at hafa til kostar sér. Af slíko varð hann ágætr <anchor id=a376.9>ok vinsæll.

<p><anchor id=a376.10>Þórvaldr fór víða um Suðrl&aolig;nd. Hann fann í Saxlande suðr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a376.11>byscop þann es Friðrekr hét, ok tók af hónom skírn ok trú rétta, <anchor id=a376.12>ok vas með hónom um hríð. Þórvaldr bað byscop fara til Íslannz <anchor id=a376.13>með ser at skíra f&aolig;ðor sínn, ok móðor, ok aðra frændr sína, þá es <anchor id=a376.14>hans ráðe vildo fylgja. Byscop veitte hónom þat.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a376.15><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þeir Friðrekr byscop ok Þórvaldr kómo til Íslannz sumar þat<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a376.16>es landet hafðe bygt veret c<note place=apparatus id=an376.1><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>c]</ab> om. Cd.</note> vetra ok vii vetr.

<p n=1.2.1><anchor id=a376.17>Þá hafðe Þórkell Máne L&aolig;g-s&aolig;go.

<p n=1.2.2><anchor id=a376.18>En þesser vóro st&oeacute;rster h&aolig;fðingjar á landeno&mdash;

<p n=1.2.3><anchor id=a376.19>Eyjolfr Valgerðar son <hi>norðr</hi>; ok Víga-Glúmr; Arnórr Ker&shy;lingar-nef; <anchor id=a377.1><pb id=pb377 n=377>Þórvarðr<note place=apparatus id=an377.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórvarðr]</ab> om. Cd.</note> Spak-B&aolig;ðvars son; ok þeir Starre br&oeacute;ðr í <anchor id=a377.2>Goð-d&aolig;lom; Þórkell Crafla í Vatzdale.

<p n=1.2.4><anchor id=a377.3>En <hi>vestr</hi> vóro þá&mdash;Are Márs son; Ásgeirr Cnattar son; Eyjolfr <anchor id=a377.4>Gráe; Gestr enn Spake; Óláfr Páe; Víga-Styrr; Snorre Goðe <anchor id=a377.5>vas þá xviij vetra, ok hafðe tekeð við búe at Helga-felle<note place=apparatus id=an377.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> H&oelig;lga-fialle, Cd.</note>; Þór&shy;steinn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a377.6>Egils son.

<p n=1.2.5><anchor id=a377.7>En <hi>suðr</hi><note place=apparatus id=an377.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>En suðr]</ab> om. Cd.</note>&mdash;Illoge enn Rauðe; ok Þórkell Máne; ok Þóroddr <anchor id=a377.8>Goðe; Gizorr enn Hvíte; Ásgrímr Elliða-Gríms son; Hialte <anchor id=a377.9>Skeggja son; Valgarðr at Hofe; Rúnolfr Ulfs son; ok syner <anchor id=a377.10>Ornolfs í Skógom.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=1.2.6><anchor id=a377.11>En <hi>austr</hi>&mdash;Syner Þórðar Freys-goða; Síðo-Hallr; Helge <anchor id=a377.12>Ásbiarnar son; Víga-Biarne; ok Geiter.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a377.13><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Svá er sagt er þeir byscop ok Þórvaldr fóro um Norðlendinga-fiórðung; <anchor id=a377.14>ok talaðe Þórvaldr trú fyrer m&aolig;nnom&mdash;þvi at <anchor id=a377.15>byscop undir-stóð þá eige Norr&oeacute;no; en Þórvaldr flutte diarflega<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a377.16>Guðs &oelig;rende; en flester menn vikoz lítt under af orðom þeirra&mdash;tók <anchor id=a377.17>við trú Onundr enn Cristne, son Þórgils ór Reykjar-dal, Gren&shy;jaðar <anchor id=a377.18>son<hi>ar</hi>; ok Hlenne enn Gamle, son Orms Tosco-baks; ok <anchor id=a377.19>Þórvarðr Spak-B&aolig;ðvars son í Áse í Hialtadal; en Eyjolfr Valgerðar&shy;son <anchor id=a377.20>lét primsignaz.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a377.21><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Byscop ok Þórvaldr vóro at Gilj-&aoacute; með Coðrane enn fyrsta <anchor id=a377.22>vetr, með xiii<hi rend=sup>da</hi> mann<note place=apparatus id=an377.4><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> xiii m&acomb;, Cd.</note>. Þórvaldr bað f&aolig;ðor sínn skíraz, en hann <anchor id=a377.23>tók því seinlega.

<p><anchor id=a377.24>At Gilj-&aoacute; stóð steinn sá er þeir frændr h&aolig;fðo blótað, ok k&aolig;lloðo <anchor id=a378.1><pb id=pb378 n=378>þar búa í ár-mann sínn. Coðran lézt eige mundo fyrre skíraz láta, <anchor id=a378.2>en hann visse hvárr meirr mætte, byscop eða ár-maðr í steinenom. <anchor id=a378.3>Efter þat fór byscop til steinsens, ok s&oelig;ng yfer þar til er steinnenn <anchor id=a378.4>brast í sundr. Þá þóttez Coðran skilja at ármaðr var sigraðr. <anchor id=a378.5>Lét Coðran þá skíraz<note place=apparatus id=an378.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>skíraz]</ab> skíra sik, Cd.</note>, ok hiú hans &aolig;ll; nema Ormr, son hans, vilde<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a378.6>eige við trú taka; fór hann þá suðr í Borgar-fi&aolig;rð ok kauper <anchor id=a378.7>land at Hvann-eyre.

<p n=1.5><anchor id=a378.8><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Ormr átte Þórv&aolig;ro, dóttor Ozorar ok Bero Egils dóttor; þeirra <anchor id=a378.9>dótter var Yngvildr, es átte Hermundr Illuga son. Síðan átte Ormr <anchor id=a378.10>Geirlaugo, dóttor Steinmóðs ur Diúpa-dal: þeirra dótter vas Bera,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a378.11>es átte Skúle Þórsteins son.

<p n=2.1><anchor id=a378.12><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Þeir byscop ok Þórvaldr gerðo bú at L&oeacute;kja-móte <anchor id=a378.13>í Víðe-dal, ok bioggo þar iiij vetr. Þeir fóro víða um <anchor id=a378.14>Ísland at boða trú. Þeir byscop ok Þórvaldr vóro at haust-boðe <anchor id=a378.15>í Vatzdal at Hauka-gile<note place=apparatus id=an378.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hauka-gile]</ab> Gilja, Cd.</note> með Óláfe. Þar var þá komenn Þórkell<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a378.16>Crafla, ok mart annarra manna. Þar kómo berserker tveir, er <anchor id=a378.17>Haukr hét hvárr-tvegge; þeir buðo m&aolig;nnom kúgan, ok gengo <anchor id=a378.18>grenjande ok óðo elda. Þá b&aoacute;ðo menn byscop, at hann skylde <anchor id=a378.19>fyrer-koma þeim. Efter þat vígðe byscop eldenn áðr þeir &oeacute;ðe; ok <anchor id=a378.20>brunno þeir þá miok. Efter þat gengo menn at þeim, ok dr&aoacute;po<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a378.21>þá; ok vóro þeir f&oeacute;rðer á fiall upp hiá gileno&mdash;því heiter þar <anchor id=a379.1><pb id=pb379 n=379>Hauka-gil síðan. Efter þat lét Þórkell Crafla primsignaz; en <anchor id=a379.2>marger vóro skírðer, þeir er við þenna atburð vóro.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a379.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þeir Þórvaldr ok byscop fóro í Vestfirðinga-fiórðung at boða <anchor id=a379.4>trú. Þeir kómo í Hvamm um Alþinge til Þórarens Fyls-ennis; ok <anchor id=a379.5>var hann þá á þinge; en Friðgerðr, kona hans, dótter Þórðar frá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a379.6>H&aolig;fða<note place=apparatus id=an379.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dótter Þórðar frá H&aolig;fða]</ab> add. B&ast; (O).</note>, var heima, ok son þeirra Skegge. Þórvaldr talaðe þar trú <anchor id=a379.7>fyrer m&aolig;nnom, en Friðgerðr var meðan í hofeno ok blótaðe, ok <anchor id=a379.8>heyrðe hvárt þeirra orð annars; en sveinnenn Skegge hló at þeim. <anchor id=a379.9>Þá kvað Þórvaldr þetta:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a379.10>Fór-ek með dóm enn dýra, drengr hl. m. enge ...<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>
</lg>

<p n=2.2.1><anchor id=a379.11>Ecke léto menn skíraz af þeirra orðom í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge, <anchor id=a379.12>svá at menn vite þat. En í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge h&aolig;fnoðo <anchor id=a379.13>marger menn blótom, ok bruto skurð-goð sín; en sumer vildo eige <anchor id=a379.14>gialda hof-tolla.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a379.15><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórvarðr Spak-B&aolig;ðvars son lét gera kirkjo á b&oeacute; sínom í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a379.16>Áse; þat líkaðe m&aolig;nnom stór-ílla þeim er heiðner vóro.&mdash;Maðr <anchor id=a379.17>hét Claufe, son Þórvallz, Refs sonar frá Barðe; hann var h&aolig;fðinge; <anchor id=a379.18>hónom líkar þetta stór-ílla við Þórvarð; ok fór hann at finna Arn&shy;geir <anchor id=a379.19>bróðor Þórvarðz, ok bauð hónom kost á, hvárt hann vilde <anchor id=a379.20>heldr brenna kirkjona, eða drepa prest þann er byscop hafðe þar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a380.1><pb id=pb380 n=380>til fenget. Þá svarar Arngeirr: &lsquo;Let-ek hvern mínna vina at <anchor id=a380.2>gera prestenom mein; þvi at bróðer mínn hefer grimmlega hefnt <anchor id=a380.3>smærre mót-gerða; en gótt ráð ætla-ek þat at brenna kirkjona; <anchor id=a380.4>en þó vil-ek mer engo af skifta.&rsquo; Lítlo síðarr fór Claufe til <anchor id=a380.5>um nótt, ok vilde brenna kirkjona. Þeir vóro saman tio. En er<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a380.6>þeir kómo í kirkjo-garðenn, sýndez þeim sem elldr fyke út um alla <anchor id=a380.7>gluggana á kirkjonne, ok fóro því brott, at þeim sýndez &aolig;ll kirkjan <anchor id=a380.8>elldz-full. Ok er hann spurðe, at kirkjan var eige brunnen, fór <anchor id=a380.9>hann til aðra nótt, ok Arngeirr, ok ætlaðe at brenna kirkjona. En <anchor id=a380.10>er þeir h&aolig;fðo broteð kirkjona, þá kveykðe hann elldenn með fiall-rapa<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a380.11>þurrom. Elldr(<hi>enn</hi>) kviknaðe seint; þá lagðez hann niðr, ok <anchor id=a380.12>blés at inn-yfer þreskelldenn; þá kom &aolig;r í golfet hiá yfer h&aolig;fðe <anchor id=a380.13>hónom, en &aolig;nnor miðlim skyrtonnar ok síðo hans. Þá hlióp hann <anchor id=a380.14>upp ok kallaðez eige mundo bíða ennar þriðjo. Fór Arngeirr þá <anchor id=a380.15>heim&mdash;en kirkja sú var ger xvj vetrom áðr Cristne var í l&aolig;g teken<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a380.16>á Íslande; en hún stóð þá er Bótolfr var byscop at Hólom, svá at <anchor id=a380.17>ecke var at gert útan at torfom.

<p n=2.4><anchor id=a380.18><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þeir Friðrekr byscop ok Þórvaldr fóro til þings, ok bað byscop <anchor id=a380.19>Þórvald telja trú fyrer m&aolig;nnom at L&aolig;gberge, svá at hann være hiá; <anchor id=a380.20>en Þórvaldr talaðe. Þá svarar hónom m&aolig;rgom orðom ok íllom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a380.21>g&aolig;fogr maðr, Heðenn frá<note place=apparatus id=an380.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>frá]</ab> sva, Cd.</note> Svalbarðe ór Eyja-firðe.&mdash;Heðenn var son <anchor id=a380.22>Þórbiarnar, Skaga sonar, Skofta<note place=apparatus id=an380.2><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Skofta s.]</ab> add. B&ast; (O).</note> sonar; hann átte Ragneiðe stiúp-dóttor <anchor id=a381.1><pb id=pb381 n=381>ok bróðor-dóttor Eyjolfs Valgerðar sonar.&mdash;Þá b&aoacute;ðo þeir <anchor id=a381.2>skáld níða þá Þórvald ok byscop. Þetta vas þá kveðet:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a381.3>Hefer b&aolig;rn boret byscop nio,
    <l><anchor id=a381.4>Þeirra es allra Þórvaldr faðer.
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a381.5>Fyrir níð þat vá Þórvaldr tvá menn, þá er ort h&aolig;fðo kvæðet<note place=apparatus id=an381.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá er ort h&aolig;fðo kvæðet]</ab> add. B&ast; (O).</note>.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=2.5><anchor id=a381.6><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> En er þeir Þórvaldr h&aolig;fðo drepet skálden, fór hann til byscops <anchor id=a381.7>at segja hónom hvat hann hafðe gert. Byscop sat inne ok sá á <anchor id=a381.8>bók; ok áðr Þórvaldr geck inn, kómo tveir blóð-dropar á bókena <anchor id=a381.9>fyrer byscope, skilðe byscop þegar, at þat var nockor fyrer-bending. <anchor id=a381.10>En er Þórvaldr kom inn til hans, mælte byscop. &lsquo;Annat-hvárt hefer<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a381.11>þú frameð mann-dráp, ella hefer þú þat í hug þer.&rsquo; Þórvaldr seger <anchor id=a381.12>þá hvat hann hafðe gert. Byscop mælte: &lsquo;Hví fórt þú svá með.&rsquo; <anchor id=a381.13>Þórvaldr svarar: &lsquo;Ek þolða eige er þeir k&aolig;lloðo ockr raga.&rsquo; <anchor id=a381.14>Byscop mælte: &lsquo;Þat var lítel þol-raun, þó at þeir lyge þat, at þú <anchor id=a381.15>ætter b&aolig;rn, en þú hefer f&oeacute;rt orð þeirra á verra veg, þvi at vel<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a381.16>mætta-ek bera b&aolig;rn þín, ef þú &aelig;tter nockor. Eige skylde Cristenn <anchor id=a381.17>maðr sialfr leita at hefna sín, þó at hann være hatrlega smáðr, <anchor id=a381.18>heldr þola fyrir Goðs saker bríxle ok mein-gerðer.&rsquo;<note place=apparatus id=an381.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> § 5 is taken from B&ast; (O), which is here fuller and better. Biscop spurðe hví hann væge þá. &lsquo;Þvi at þeir sogðo ockr eiga born saman.&rsquo; Byscop svarar: &lsquo;Þeir lugo á ockr, en þú f&oelig;rðer ó-orð þeirra afleiðis, þvi at ek mátta vel bera born þín efter mer.&rsquo; Cd.: <foreign lang=en-UK>The bishop asked him why he slew them. &lsquo;Because they said we have children together.&rsquo; The bishop answered: &lsquo;They lied about us, but thou hast turned their wickedness in a wrong way, for I might well bear thy children after me.&rsquo;</foreign></note>

<p n=2.6><anchor id=a381.19><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> En er þeir Þórvaldr ok byscop vildo ríða á Hegra-nes-þing, <anchor id=a381.20>en heiðner menn fóro í móte þeim, ok b&aolig;rðo þá grióte, svá at þeir<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a382.1><pb id=pb382 n=382>n&aolig;ðo eige framm at fara. Þar efter gerðo menn þá sek<hi>j</hi>a, at <anchor id=a382.2>heiðnom l&aolig;gom. Þá mælte byscop: &lsquo;Nú k&oelig;mr þat framm, er <anchor id=a382.3>móðor mína dreymðe forðom daga, at hon þóttez finna vargs-hár í <anchor id=a382.4>h&aolig;fðe mér, þvi at nú ero ver g&oelig;rver ræker ok rekner sem sk&oeacute;ðer <anchor id=a382.5>vargar.&rsquo;<note place=apparatus id=an382.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þá m. byscop ... vargar]</ab> add. B&ast; (O).</note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p><anchor id=a382.6>En þat sumar eftir Alþinge<note place=apparatus id=an382.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eftir Alþ.]</ab> B&ast; (O); epter á Alþ., Cd.</note>, s&aolig;mnoðo h&aolig;fðingjar liðe, ok riðo <anchor id=a382.7>með cc manna, ok ætloðo at brenna þá byscop inne. Þeir &aoacute;ðo <anchor id=a382.8>hrossom sínom áðr þeir riðo heim á b&oeacute;enn at L&oeacute;kja-móte. En <anchor id=a382.9>er þeir skyldo á bak hlaupa, flugo fuglar upp hiá þeim; við þat <anchor id=a382.10>fældoz hestar þeirra, ok fello menn af bake; sumer bruto hendr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a382.11>sínar, en sumer f&oeacute;tr; eða skeindoz á v&aoacute;pnom sínom. Frá sumom <anchor id=a382.12>hliópo hrossen, ok fóro þeir við þat heim aftr. Við þetta her-hlaup <anchor id=a382.13>urðo þeir byscop ecke varer fyrr en efter&mdash;þá h&aolig;fðo þeir þriá vetr <anchor id=a382.14>búet at L&oeacute;kja-móte. Þeir bioggo þar vetr síðan.<note place=apparatus id=an382.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Emend.; bioggo þeir Þ. þann enn fiórða vetr at L&oelig;kjam., B&ast; (O); þeir b. þar v vetr síðan, Cd.</note>

<p n=2.7><anchor id=a382.15><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Efter þat fóro þeir útan: en er þeir kómo til Noregs,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a382.16>l&aoacute;go þeir í einne h&aolig;fn: þá kom þar Heðenn af Íslande í þá s&aolig;mo <anchor id=a382.17>h&aolig;fn; ok fór þegar upp í skóg at h&oelig;ggva við. En er Þórvaldr <anchor id=a382.18>varð varr við þat, fór hann með þræl sínn, ok lét vega hann þar. <anchor id=a382.19>En er byscop visse þat, þá sagðe byscop, at þá munde skilja félag <anchor id=a382.20>þeirra þat er hann var heipt-rækr. Byscop fór þá suðr í Saxland,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a383.1><pb id=pb383 n=383>ok andaðez þar; ok er hann maðr sann-heilagr. En Þórvaldr var <anchor id=a383.2>þá fyrst í kaup-ferðum um hríð.

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a383.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Ádogom Harallz konungs Gorms sonar kom Albertus <anchor id=a383.4>af Brimom á Iótland til Ár-óss, ok settez þar á stóla. <anchor id=a383.5>Þangbrandr hét clerkr hans, son Vilbaldus greifa af Brimom. En<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a383.6>þá er Þangbrandr var vaxenn, bad Hugbertus byscop af Cantara&shy;borg <anchor id=a383.7>Albertus bróðor sínom til sín. At þeirre veizlo gaf Hugbertus <anchor id=a383.8>Alberto giafer, ok &aolig;llom f&aolig;ro-nautom hans. Þá mælte byscop við <anchor id=a383.9>Þangbrand: &lsquo;Þú ert háttaðr sem riddarar; því gef-ek þer ski&aolig;ld; <anchor id=a383.10>ok er á markaðr cross með líkneske Dróttens várs&mdash;þat merker<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a383.11>lærdóm þínn.&rsquo;

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a383.12><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Lítlu síðarr fann Þangbrandr Óláf Tryggva son í Vindlande. <anchor id=a383.13>Óláfr spurðe: &lsquo;Hvern dýrkeð-ér Cristner menn á crosse píndan?&rsquo; <anchor id=a383.14>Þangbrandr svarar: &lsquo;Dróttenn Várn Jesum Christum.&rsquo; Konungr <anchor id=a383.15>spyrr: &lsquo;Fyrer hvat var hann píndr; eða hvat s&aolig;k gerðe hann?&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a383.16>Þá sagðe Þangbrandr Óláfe konunge innvirðilega frá píning Dróttins <anchor id=a383.17>Várs ok táknom Crossens. Konungr falaðe þá ski&aolig;ldenn; <anchor id=a383.18>en Þangbrandr gaf hónom ski&aolig;ldenn, en konungr gaf hónom iam-virðe <anchor id=a383.19>skialdarens í brendo silfre ok mælte. &lsquo;Ef þú þarft nockors <anchor id=a383.20>traustz eða hallz, kom þá til mín, ok mun-ek þá launa þer ski&aolig;ldenn.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a383.21><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Nockoro<note place=apparatus id=an383.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Nockoro]</ab> here come in four continuous vellum leaves, see Landn., p. 227, n. 10.</note> síðarr lét Óláfr konungr skíraz í Syllingom á Írlande. <anchor id=a383.22>Þangbrandr kauper mey eina Írska ok fagra með silfreno. En er <anchor id=a384.1><pb id=pb384 n=384>hann kom heim með hána, þá vilde sá maðr, er Otto enn Unge <anchor id=a384.2>keisare hafðe gíslat þangat, taka af hónom meyna; en hann vilde <anchor id=a384.3>eige lausa láta. Gíslenn var kappe mikell, ok bauð Þangbrande á <anchor id=a384.4>pataldr, en Þangbrandr hafðe sigr, ok drap hann&mdash;því mátte Þangbrandr <anchor id=a384.5>eige vera í Danm&aolig;rk, ok fór hann þá til Óláfs konungs<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a384.6>Tryggva-sonar, ok tók hann vel við hónom; ok var hann vígðr <anchor id=a384.7>þar til prestz, ok var hann hirð-prestr hans um hríð.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a384.8><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Óláfr konungr fór af Írlande ok austr í Holm-garð, en ór <anchor id=a384.9>Holm-garðe til Noregs, sem ritað er í s&aolig;go hans; ok bauð þar <anchor id=a384.10>Cristne allre alþýðo. Hann let gera fyrsto kirkjo í ey þeirre er<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a384.11>Mostr heiter. Þar lét hann Þangbrand syngja í eynne, ok feck <anchor id=a384.12>hónom bú ok iarðer. Hann var eyzlo-maðr mikell ok &oelig;rr, ok <anchor id=a384.13>geck brátt upp fé hans. Þá feck hann ser lang-skip, ok herjaðe á <anchor id=a384.14>heiðna menn, ok rænte víða, ok lagðe þat fé fyrer lið sítt.

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a384.15><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Óláfr konungr kom í Noreg á andverðre G&oeacute;: með hónom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a384.16>vóro marger Íslenzker menn. Sá var einn er Stefner hét; hann <anchor id=a384.17>var son Þórgils, Eilífs sonar, Helga sonar Biolu af Kialar-nese. <anchor id=a384.18>Óláfr konungr sende Stefne til Íslannz et fyrsta sumar, er hann <anchor id=a384.19>kom í Noreg, at boða þar Goðs erende. En er hann kom til <anchor id=a384.20>Íslannz, þá tóko menn ílla við hónom, þvi at allr lýðr var þá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a384.21>heiðenn á lande her. En hann fór diarflega, b&oeacute;ðe norðr ok suðr <anchor id=a384.22>ok kende m&aolig;nnom rétta trú; en menn skipoðoz lítt við hans <anchor id=a384.23>kenningar. Ok er hann sá, at þat hafðe engan fram-gang, þá tók <anchor id=a385.1><pb id=pb385 n=385>hann at meiða hof ok h&aolig;rga, en brióta skurð-goð. Þá s&aolig;mnoðo <anchor id=a385.2>heiðner menn liðe, ok komz hann þá á Kialar-nes nauðolega, ok <anchor id=a385.3>var þar með frændom sínom. Skip hans stóð uppe í Gufár-óse; <anchor id=a385.4>þat tók út um vetrenn í vatna-v&aolig;xtom ok of-viðre. Þar um kv&aoacute;ðo <anchor id=a385.5>heiðner menn þetta:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a385.6>Nú hefer stafn-vali<hi>nn</hi> Stefnes ...
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a385.7>Skip kom á land, ok lítt broteð<note place=apparatus id=an385.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> bratiz, Cd.</note>, ok lét Stefner gera at því um <anchor id=a385.8>váret.

<p n=3.6><anchor id=a385.9><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þat sumar á Alþinge vas þat í l&aolig;g teket, at frændr enna <anchor id=a385.10>Cristno manna skylldo s&oeacute;kja um þá<note place=apparatus id=an385.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>um þá]</ab> thus Cd.</note> goð-l&aolig;ston, nánare an þriðja<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a385.11>br&oeacute;ðra, ok firnare an næsta br&oeacute;ðra. Þat sumar vas Stefner sóttr <anchor id=a385.12>um Cristne; þá s&aolig;k sótto þeir frændr hans,&mdash;þvi at Cristnen vas <anchor id=a385.13>þá k&aolig;lloð frænda-sk&aolig;mm: syner Usvifrs ens Spaka, Þórolfr ok <anchor id=a385.14>Áskell, Vandráðr ok Torráðr, sótto hann; en Úspakr vilde &oelig;ngan <anchor id=a385.15>hlut at eiga; en Stefner mælte: &lsquo;Ecke mein mun mer verða at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a385.16>sekð mínne, en fyrer þessa s&aolig;k mun yðr henda mikel ógifta á fárra <anchor id=a385.17>vetra freste.&rsquo; Stefner fór út um sumaret, ok tók Óláfr konungr <anchor id=a385.18>vel við hónom.

<p n=3.7><anchor id=a385.19><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þá er Óláfr konungr spurðe óspekðer þær er Þangbrandr <anchor id=a385.20>gerðe, stefnde hann hónom til sín ok bar saker á hann, ok kvað<note place=apparatus id=an385.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> Small hole in vell.</note><ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a385.21>hann ecke skyldo vera í sínne þiónasto, er hann var ráns-maðr. <anchor id=a386.1><pb id=pb386 n=386>Þangbrandr bað konung leggja á hendr ser nockora torvelda <anchor id=a386.2>sende-ferð. Konungr mælte: &lsquo;Sátter skolo vit, ef þú ferr til <anchor id=a386.3>Íslannz, ok fær Cristnað landet.&rsquo; Þangbrandr mælte: &lsquo;Til þess <anchor id=a386.4>mun-ek hætta.&rsquo;



<p n=4.1><anchor id=a386.5><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Þat sumar fór Þangbrandr til Íslannz. Hann kom í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a386.6>Alfta-fi&aolig;rð enn nerðra í Sel-vága fyr norðan Melracka-nes. <anchor id=a386.7>En er menn visso at Þangbrandr var Cristenn ok hans menn, <anchor id=a386.8>þá vildo þeir ecke við þá mæla lannz-mennener, ok eige vísa þeim <anchor id=a386.9>til hafnar.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a386.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þá bió Síðo-Hallr at Á; hann fór til Fliótz-dals; en er hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a386.11>kom þar, þá fór Þangbrandr at finna hann, ok sagðe hónom at <anchor id=a386.12>Óláfr konungr hafðe sendan hann til Hallz, ef hann kvæme í Aust&shy;fi&aolig;rðo, <anchor id=a386.13>ok bað hann vísa þeim til hafnar, ok veita þeim annan <anchor id=a386.14>dugnað þann er þeir þurfto. Hallr lét flytja þá til Alfta-fiarðar <anchor id=a386.15>ens Syðra í Leiro-vág; ok sette upp skip þeirra þar er nú<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a386.16>heiter Þangbranz-hróf; en Hallr f&oeacute;rðe skip-farmenn heim á tún-v&aolig;ll <anchor id=a386.17>sínn, ok gerðe þar tiald þat er þeir Þangbrandr vóro í: þar <anchor id=a386.18>s&oelig;ng Þangbrandr messo. Enn næsta dag fyrer Michials messo þá <anchor id=a386.19>léto þeir Þangbrandr heilagt at nóne; þá var Hallr þar í tialdeno. <anchor id=a386.20>Hann spurðe: &lsquo;Hví létte þér nú verke?&rsquo; Þangbrandr seger:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a386.21>&lsquo;Á morgin er hátíð Michials h&aolig;foð-engils.&rsquo; Hallr spurðe: &lsquo;Hverso <anchor id=a386.22>er hann háttaðr?&rsquo; Þangbrandr svarar: &lsquo;Hann er settr til þess, at <anchor id=a386.23>fara mót s&aoacute;lom Cristinna manna.&rsquo; Síðan sagðe Þangbrandr mart <anchor id=a386.24>frá dýrð Goðs Engla. Hallr mælte: &lsquo;Voldogr mun sá er þesser <anchor id=a386.25>Englar þióna.&rsquo; Þangbrandr seger: &lsquo;Goð gefr þer þessa skilning.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a387.1><pb id=pb387 n=387>Hallr sagðe um kveldet hiúnom sínom: &lsquo;Á morgin halda þeir <anchor id=a387.2>Þangbrandr heilagt Goðe sínom; ok nú vil-ek, at ér nióteð þess; <anchor id=a387.3>ok skoloð ér ecke vinna á morgin; ok skolo ver<note place=apparatus id=an387.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> skolo þer, Cd.</note> nú ganga at siá athæfi <anchor id=a387.4>Cristinna manna.&rsquo; Um morginenn veitte Þangbrandr tíðer <anchor id=a387.5>í tialde síno, en Hallr geck ok hiún hans at siá athæfe þeirra; ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a387.6>heyrðe clocna-hlióð, ok kendo ilm af reykelse; ok sá menn skrýdda <anchor id=a387.7>goðvef ok purpora. Hallr spurðe hiún sín, hverso þeim þockaðez<note place=apparatus id=an387.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> þokknadiz, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a387.8>athæfe Cristinna manna; en þau léto vel yfer. Hallr var skírðr <anchor id=a387.9>Laugardagenn fyrir Pasca, oc hiún hans &aolig;ll þar í ánne.&mdash;Hon er <anchor id=a387.10>síðan k&aolig;lloð Þvátt-á.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p><anchor id=a387.11>[B&ast; (O): Var Hallr skírðr Þvátt-dagenn fyr Pasca í brunn-l&oeacute;k <anchor id=a387.12>sínom, ok allt hans heima-folk. Gaf Þangbrandr prestr þá nafn l&oeacute;k <anchor id=a387.13>þeim ok kallaðe Þvátt-á, sem síðan er b&oeacute;renn við kendr.]

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a387.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an387.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> B&ast; (N):&mdash;Um váret efter fór Þangbrandr at boða Cristne ok Hallr með hónom: en es þeir kómo vestr um Lóns-heiðe, til Stafa-fellz&mdash;þar bió Þórkell; hann mælte mest í móte trúnne, ok scoraðe Þangbrand á holm; þá bar Þangbrandr róðo-cross fyrer skiöldenn, ok lauk svá með þeim at Þangbrandr hafðe sigr ok drap Þórkel:&mdash;<foreign lang=en-UK>In the spring after Thangbrand went forth to preach Christendom, and Hall with him; but when they came west over Lon&apos;s-heath to Staff-fell, there dwelt Thorkell. He spake most against the faith, and challenged Thangbrand to wager of battle. Thangbrand bore a red cross on his shield there, and it ended so with them that Thangbrand had the victory and slew Thorkell. (<hi>Apocryphal probably and of the Niala Editor&apos;s making.</hi>)</foreign></note>Um sumaret reið Þangbrandr til Alþinges með Halle. En er <anchor id=a387.15>þeir kómo í Skóga-hverfe, þá kaupa heiðner menn at þeim manne<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a387.16>er Galdra-Heðenn hét, at hann felde i&aolig;rð under Þangbrande. Þann <anchor id=a387.17>dag er þeir riðo or Kirkjo-b&oeacute; frá Surtz, Ásbiarnar sonar, Þórsteins <anchor id=a388.1><pb id=pb388 n=388>sonar<note place=apparatus id=an388.1><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórsteins s.]</ab> add. B&ast; (O), Landn.; om. Cd.</note>, Ketils sonar ens Fíflska.&mdash;Þeir vóro aller skírðir lang-feðgar.

<p><anchor id=a388.2>[B&ast; (O). Þeir lang-feðgar bioggo í Kirkju-b&oelig; hverr efter annan, <anchor id=a388.3>ok vóru aller Cristner, þvi at þar mátti aldri heiðinn maðr búa.]

<p><anchor id=a388.5>Þá fell hestr Þangbranz í i&aolig;rð niðr; en hann hlióp af bake ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a388.6>stóð á backanom heill. Þangbrandr skírðe marga menn í f&aolig;r <anchor id=a388.7>þeirre, Gizor enn Hvíta ok Hall í Hauka-dale&mdash;hann var þá þré-vetr&mdash;ok <anchor id=a388.8>Hialta Skeggja son. Þangbrandr flutte skoroliga Goðs <anchor id=a388.9>&oelig;rende á þinge, ok tóko þá marger menn við trú í Sunnlendinga-fiórðunge, <anchor id=a388.10>ok Norðlendinga-fiórðunge. Hann fór efter þinget, ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a388.11>ætlaðe et eystra til Eyja-fiarðar<note place=apparatus id=an388.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> ok í norðr-sveitom Eyfirðinga-fiórdungs, B&ast; (O).</note>. Kom hann norðr í &OElig;xar-fi&aolig;rð <anchor id=a388.12>um sumaret, ok skírðe marga menn í l&oeacute;k þeim hiá Skinna-st&aolig;ðom, <anchor id=a388.13>er Brannz-l&oelig;kr heiter síðan<note place=apparatus id=an388.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Kom hann ... heiter síðan]</ab> B&ast; (O); hann skírðe marga menn í Þangbranz-l&oeacute;k í Axarfirðe, Cd.</note>; ok at Mý-vatne í Þangbranz polle; <anchor id=a388.14>en eige náðe hann lengra framm at fara an til Skialfanda-fliótz <anchor id=a388.15>fyrir ríke Eyfirðinga. Hvarf hann þá aftr í Aust-fi&aolig;rðo; ok kende<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a388.16>þar trú. Þangbrandr fór et syðra þaðan vestr.

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a388.17><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En þá er Þangbrandr kende trú fyrer m&aolig;nnom á Íslande; <anchor id=a388.18>tóko marger menn þat til at níða hann. Þat gerðe Þórvaldr enn <anchor id=a388.19>Veile, er bió í Vík<note place=apparatus id=an388.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Vík]</ab> Eyvík, B&ast; (O).</note> í Gríms-nese. Hann orte um Þangbrand; ok <anchor id=a388.20>hann kvað þessa víso til Ulfs skaldz:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a388.21>Uskelfom skal-ek Ulfe einhendis ...
</lg>

<pb id=pb389 n=389><p n=4.4.2><anchor id=a389.1>Þetta kvað Ulfr í móte:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a389.2>Teckat-ek syndz þó at sendi sannreynis ...
</lg>

<p n=4.4.4><anchor id=a389.3>Vetrliðe skáld orte ok níð um Þangbrand, ok marger aðrer. En <anchor id=a389.4>þá er (þeir) kómo vestr í Fliótz-hlíð,&mdash;en Goðleifr Ara son af <anchor id=a389.5>Reykja-hólom var með hónom&mdash;spurðu þeir<note place=apparatus id=an389.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> þeir spurðu, Cd.</note> at Vetrliðe skáld var<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a389.6>at torf-skurðe með húsk&aolig;rlom sínom. Þeir Þangbrandr fóro til ok <anchor id=a389.7>v&aoacute;go hann þar. Þetta var kveðet um Goðleif<note place=apparatus id=an389.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Guðleigi, Cd.</note>:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a389.8>Ryðfiónar geck reynir randa ...
</lg>

<p n=4.4.6><anchor id=a389.9>Þaðan fóro þeir vestr í Gríms-nes, ok fundo Þórvald enn Veila við <anchor id=a389.10>Hest-l&oeacute;k, ok v&aoacute;go hann þar. Þaðan hurfo þeir aftr, ok vóro með<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a389.11>Halle annan vetr; en um váret bió Þangbrandr skip sítt.



<p n=5.1><anchor id=a389.12><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Þat sumarvar Þangbrandr sóttr til sektar um víg þesse. <anchor id=a389.13>Hann lét út, ok varð aftr-reka í Borgar-fi&aolig;rð í <anchor id=a389.14>Hitar-á&mdash;þar heiter nú Þangbranz-hróf niðr frá Skipa-hyl; ok þar <anchor id=a389.15>stendr enn festar-steinn hans á berge eino.&mdash;En er þeir vóro þar<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a389.16>komner, h&aolig;fðo heraðs-menn fund at því, at banna þeim kaup &aolig;ll. <anchor id=a389.17>Þangbrandr kom á Crossa-holt, ok s&oelig;ng þar messo, ok reiste þar <anchor id=a389.18>crossa.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a389.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Kolr hét maðr er bió í L&oeacute;kjar-bug; hann átte mat svá <anchor id=a389.20>mikenn, at hann visse varla hvat hann skylde af gera. Þangbrandr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a390.1><pb id=pb390 n=390>fór þangat, ok falaðe mat at hónom; en hann vilde engan selja. <anchor id=a390.2>Þeir tóko matenn, ok l&aolig;gðo verð efter. Kolr fór ofan á Hitar-nes<note place=apparatus id=an390.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Hit<hi rend=sup>r</hi>-ness, vell.</note>, <anchor id=a390.3>ok kærðe fyr Skegg-Birne er þar bió. Hann fór með Kol at finna <anchor id=a390.4>Þangbrand, ok b&aoacute;ðo hann láta rakna ránet ok b&oeacute;ta fyrer; en <anchor id=a390.5>Þangbrandr neitaðe því þverlega. Þeir b&aolig;rðoz á fitenne ofan frá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a390.6>Steins-holte. Þar fell Skegg-Bi&aolig;rn ok átta menn aðrer&mdash;þar er <anchor id=a390.7>haugr Skegg-Biarnar á fitenne.&mdash;En aðrer vóro iarðaðer í Land-draugs-holte <anchor id=a390.8>þar hiá fitenne; ok sér þar enn g&oelig;rla kumlen. Tveir <anchor id=a390.9>menn fello af Þangbrande.

<p><anchor id=a390.10>En er Gizorr enn Hvíte spurðe þesse tíðende, bauð hann Þangbrande<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a390.11>til sín, ok var hann þar enn þriðja vetr.

<p n=5.3><anchor id=a390.12><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þann vetr tók út skip Þangbranz or Hitar-á, ok braut miok, <anchor id=a390.13>ok rak á land fyr sunnan Kalfa-l&oeacute;k.

<p n=5.4><anchor id=a390.14><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> [B&ast; (N): Steinv&aolig;r kom í móte hónom móðer Scalld-Refs, <anchor id=a390.15>hon boðaðe Þangbrande heiðne, ok talðe lenge fyr hónom. Þangbrandr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a390.16>þagðe meðan hon talaðe; en talaðe lenge efter ok snere <anchor id=a390.17>því í villo es hon hafðe mælt: &lsquo;Hefer-þú heyrt þat.&rsquo; sagðe hon, &lsquo;es <anchor id=a390.18>Þórr bauð Criste á holm, ok þorðe hann eige at berjaz við Þór?&rsquo; <anchor id=a390.19>&lsquo;Heyrt hefe-ek,&rsquo; seger Þangbrandr, &lsquo;at Þórr vas ecke nema mold <anchor id=a390.20>ok aska, ef Goð vilde eige at hann lifðe.&rsquo; &lsquo;Veiztú,&rsquo; seger hon,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a390.21>&lsquo;hverr broteð hefer skip þítt?&rsquo; &lsquo;Hvat seger þú til?&rsquo; seger hann. <anchor id=a390.22>&lsquo;Þat mon-ec segja her,&rsquo; seger hon.]<note place=apparatus id=an390.2><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> Þar um orte St. m. Skald-Refs þetta, <hi>and the verse</hi>, Cd.</note>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a390.23>Þór brá þvinnils dýre ...
    <pb id=pb391 n=391><l><anchor id=a391.1>Braut fyr biollo gæti ...
</lg>

<p n=5.5><anchor id=a391.2><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an391.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> B&ast; (O) omits all chapter 5, and has instead of it&mdash;En er Þangbrandr var skamt í haf kominn, þá logðoz á mót-viðri með stormom, ok varð hann aftr-reka til Íslanz. Tók hann land i Höfn í Borgar-firðe skamt frá Hvítá. Þá bió í Skálholte Gizorr Hvíte, Teitz son, Ketilbiarnar sonar, en er hann spurðe at Þangbrandr var orðinn aptr-reka, þá bauð hann hónom til sin ok var Þangbrandr í Skálholte um vetrinn. Á þeim vetre tók stormr skip Þangbranz ok braut nockot. Um þat orte Steinunn m. Skald-Refs. Þórr brá ... Ok enn kvað hon&mdash;Braut fyrir ... Þat skip lét Þangbrandr bæta ok kallaðe Iárn-meis&mdash;þar er við kendr Iárn-meis-hofðe.&mdash;<hi lang=en-UK>Follows the journey to Bard-strand.</hi> Efter þat fór Þangbrandr til skips síns, ok fór útan um sumaret á Iárn-meisnom; ok tókz sú ferð vel; kom af hafe útan at Þróndheime ok lagðe skipe síno inn til Níðar-óss.</note>Þangbrandr fór um váret vestr á Barða-str&aolig;nd, at finna Gest <anchor id=a391.3>enn Spaka. Þar skoraðe Nor&oeacute;nn<note place=apparatus id=an391.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> noren, vell.</note> berserkr á hann til holm-g&aolig;ngo. <anchor id=a391.4>Þangbrandr iátte því. Berserkrenn mælte: &lsquo;Eige muntú þora at <anchor id=a391.5>berjaz við mik, ef þú sér íþrótter mínar. Ek geng berom fótom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a391.6>um eld brennanda; ok ek læt fallaz berr á sax-odd mínn; ok <anchor id=a391.7>sakar mik hvárke.&rsquo; Þangbrandr svarar: &lsquo;Goð mun því ráða.&rsquo; <anchor id=a391.8>Þangbrandr vígðe eldenn, en gerðe cross-mark yfer saxeno. <anchor id=a391.9>Berserkrenn brann á fótom er hann óð eldenn. En er hann fell á <anchor id=a391.10>saxet, stóð þat í gegnom hann; ok feck hann af því bana. Þesso<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a391.11>f&aolig;gnoðo marger góðer menn þó at heiðner være. Þá lét Gestr <anchor id=a391.12>prim-signaz; ok nockorer viner hans.

<p n=5.6><anchor id=a391.13><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þangbrandr fór vestan ok lét b&oeacute;ta skip sítt. Þat kallaðe hann <anchor id=a391.14>Iárn-meis. Hann siglðe suðr um fi&aolig;rð til Hafnar, ok lagðe inn <anchor id=a391.15>í vágenn, ok lá þar til hafs&mdash;þat heiter síðan Iárn-meis-h&aolig;fðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a391.16>millim Hafnar ok Belgs-holtz.&mdash;Hann fór útan um sumaret til <anchor id=a391.17>Óláfs konungs í Þróndheime.


<pb id=pb392 n=392><p n=6.1><anchor id=a392.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> Um sumaret á þinge vas mikel umbr&oeacute;ða um trúna, <anchor id=a392.2>es Þangbrandr boðaðe, ok goðl&aolig;stoðo þá sumer <anchor id=a392.3>menn miok. En þeir es skírðer vóro ámælto goðonom; ok vas <anchor id=a392.4>at því sveitar-dr&aoacute;ttr mikell. Þá kvað Hialte Skeggja son kviðling <anchor id=a392.5>þenna at L&aolig;gberge:<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a392.6>Vil ek <hi>hauga</hi> Goð geyja: grey þicke mer Freyja:
    <l><anchor id=a392.7>Æ man<note place=apparatus id=an392.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Æ man ...]</ab> (2nd line) add. B&ast; (O and N); om. Cd.</note> annat-tveggja Óðinn grey eða Freyja.
</lg>

<p n=6.1.1><anchor id=a392.8>Under þann kviðling tók Rún-ólfr Goðe, son Ulfs, Iorundar sonar <anchor id=a392.9>Goða, ok sótte Hialta um goð-g&aoacute;. Hann lýste meirr í því ríke <anchor id=a392.10>sítt ok þrá-lynde an réttlæte, þvi at hann gat eige haldet dómenom<note place=apparatus id=an392.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dómenom]</ab> thus vell, and B&ast; (O).</note><ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a392.11>fyrer vin-sælð Hialta, fyrr an hann sette á &OElig;xar-ár-brú, ok lét verja <anchor id=a392.12>brúar-sporðana<note place=apparatus id=an392.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> lét verja víge brúar-sporðana, B&ast; (O).</note><note place=apparatus id=an392.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-sporðana]</ab> B&ast; (O); -skorðana, vell.</note> báða með v&aoacute;pnum. Þá varð einge til at reifa málet <anchor id=a392.13>fyrr an Þórbi&aolig;rn, son Þórkels or Goðd&aolig;lom, settesc í dómenn <anchor id=a392.14>ok reifðe málet. Í þeim dóme vas Hialte d&oeacute;mðr sekr fior&shy;baugs-maðr <anchor id=a392.15>um goð-g&aoacute;.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a392.16><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þat sumar fór hann útan á því skipe es hann hafðe g&oelig;ra <anchor id=a392.17>láteð heima þar í Þiórs-ár-dale, ok f&oeacute;rðe efter Rang-&aoacute; enne vestre <anchor id=a392.18>til sióvar skipet. Ok es þeir fóro efter &aoacute;nne ofan, þá rann maðr <anchor id=a392.19>efter landeno, ok hafðe í hende spiót ok ski&aolig;ld. Hialte mælte til hans:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a392.20>Þer liggr halms-visk þar es hiartað skylde.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a392.21>Sá skaut spióteno til Hialta; en Hialte greip ski&aolig;lld, ok kom þar <anchor id=a392.22>í spióteð. Menn Hialta hliópo<note place=apparatus id=an392.5><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> lupu, vell.</note> á land ok tóko hann, ok spurðo <anchor id=a392.23>hverr hann være. Hann kvazc Narfe heita, ok kvað Rúnólf hafa <anchor id=a393.1><pb id=pb393 n=393>sendan<note place=apparatus id=an393.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> sent, Cd.</note> sik til h&aolig;foðs Hialta, ok skylde hann svá leysa sik undan <anchor id=a393.2>sekðom. Hialte mælte: &lsquo;Kann ek þer betra ráð; far þú útan með <anchor id=a393.3>mer, ok mon-ek g&oelig;ra þik syknan<note place=apparatus id=an393.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>syknan]</ab> B&ast; (O); þignan, vell. (= þig(syk)nan).</note>.&rsquo; Hialte fór útan, ok kom um <anchor id=a393.4>hausteð norðr í Þróndheim á fund Óláfs konungs. Þá kom ok <anchor id=a393.5>útan af Íslande Gizorr Hvíte mágr hans.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a393.6><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Óláfr konungr hafðe cristnað Hálogaland, ok kom hann til <anchor id=a393.7>Níðar-óss um hausteð. Þar vóro þá marger Íslenzker menn þeir-es <anchor id=a393.8>fyr skipom réðo. Þeir stýrðo eino skipe, Ceartan Óláfs son Pá, ok <anchor id=a393.9>Kalfr Ásgeirs son, ok Bolle Þórleiks son: þar stýrðe ok Halldórr <anchor id=a393.10>síno skipe son Goðmundar ens Ríka: ok Kolbeinn son Þórðar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a393.11>Freys-goða: ok Svertingr son Rúnolfs Goða; Hallfr&oelig;ðr Óttars <anchor id=a393.12>son; ok Þórarenn Nefjúlfs son&mdash;þesser vóro aller heiðner. Þeir <anchor id=a393.13>l&aoacute;go fyre b&oeacute;nom, ok ætloðo suðr fyr land; en þeim gaf eige áðr <anchor id=a393.14>konungr k&oeacute;me<note place=apparatus id=an393.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> kom, Cd.</note> norðan.

<p n=6.4><anchor id=a393.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þat vas einn góðan veðr-dag, at menn fóro á sund ór b&oeacute;nom;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a393.16>ok s&aoacute; þeir es á skiponom vóro, at einn maðr vas myklo betr sund-f&oeacute;rr <anchor id=a393.17>an aðrer. Bolle Þórleiks son mælte við Ceartan frænda sínn, <anchor id=a393.18>&lsquo;Hví reyner þú eige sund við þann enn f&oeacute;ra mann?&rsquo; Ceartan <anchor id=a393.19>mælte: &lsquo;Ecke vil ek við hann þreyta.&rsquo; &lsquo;Hvar kom kapp þítt þá?&rsquo; <anchor id=a393.20>seger Bolle, ok kastaðe klæðonom. Þá hlióp Ceartan upp ok af<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a393.21>klæddesc, ok bað Bolla vesa kvirran<note place=apparatus id=an393.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> kvi<hi rend=sc>r</hi>an, thus vell., a Norwayism.</note>. Ceartan hlióp á sund, ok <anchor id=a393.22>lagðesc at mann-enom, ok f&oeacute;rðe hann niðr, ok hellt niðre um hríð. <anchor id=a394.1><pb id=pb394 n=394>Efter þat kómo þeir upp, ok f&oeacute;rðe Ceartan hann niðr annat <anchor id=a394.2>sinn. Ok es Ceartan vilde upp, tók sá Ceartan, ok hélt hónom <anchor id=a394.3>niðre um hríð. Et þriðja sinn f&oeacute;rðe sá Ceartan niðr, ok hélt <anchor id=a394.4>hónom svá lenge niðre, at hónom hélt við kafnan. Þá l&aolig;gðosc <anchor id=a394.5>þeir til lannz, ok spurðe þesse maðr Ceartan, ef hann visse við<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a394.6>hvern hann hafðe þreytt sundet. Hann kvazc þat eige vita. Hann <anchor id=a394.7>gaf Ceartan<hi>e</hi> skallaz-skickjo, ok kvað hann þá vita mundo, við <anchor id=a394.8>hvern hann hafðe þreytt sundet. Ceartan varð víss at þesse maðr <anchor id=a394.9>vas Óláfr konungr. Hann þackaðe hónom s&oelig;melega gi&aolig;fna. <anchor id=a394.10>Heiðner menn léto ílla yfer því es Ceartan hafðe giafar þeget af<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a394.11>kononge.

<p n=6.4.1><anchor id=a394.12>Michials-messo dag þá gengo marger Íslenzker menn at heyra <anchor id=a394.13>tíðer, ok siá sið Cristenna manna. Ok es þeir kómo aftr, r&oeacute;ddo <anchor id=a394.14>þeir um með ser, hvern veg þeim hefðe virzc þeirra athæve, <anchor id=a394.15>Ceartan lét vel yfer; en fáer aðrer. Konongr varð þess skiótt víss,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a394.16>ok sende efter Ceartan<hi>e</hi>, ok spurðe ef hann vilde taka við Cristne. <anchor id=a394.17>Ceartan kvað hann g&oelig;ra mega svá, at hann munde því eige nítta. <anchor id=a394.18>Konungr spyrr hvat hann mæler til. &lsquo;At ér fáet mer eige minna<note place=apparatus id=an394.1><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> þer, vell. minni, vell.</note> <anchor id=a394.19>sóma her an ek á vón á Íslande, þó at ek koma þar eige.&rsquo; Konungr <anchor id=a394.20>iátte því. Ceartan vas þá skírðr, ok vas í boðe konungs meðan<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a394.21>hann vas í hvíta-v&aoacute;ðom.

<p lang=en-UK><anchor id=a394.22>[B&ast; (O) <hi>om. the whole extraneous Ceartan episode, but treats</hi> § 3 <hi>at <anchor id=a394.23>greater length:</hi>&mdash;

<p n=6.4.2><anchor id=a394.24>Nú verðr fyrst at segja frá þeim Íslenzkom m&aolig;nnom, es þetta <anchor id=a395.1><pb id=pb395 n=395>sama sumar kómo útan af Íslande til Níðar-óss, lítlo áðr an Óláfr <anchor id=a395.2>konungr kom norðan af Hálogalande. Þar vas einn maðr Hall&shy;dórr, <anchor id=a395.3>son Goðmundar ens Ríka af M&aolig;ðro-v&aolig;llom; annarr Kolbeinn <anchor id=a395.4>son Þórðar Freys-goða, bróðer Brenno-Flosa; þriðe Svertingr son <anchor id=a395.5>Rúnolfs Goða; þar réð ok fyre skipe Þórarenn Nefjulfs-son&mdash;þésser<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a395.6>vóro aller heiðner; ok marger aðrer, bæðe ríker ok óríker. Þesser <anchor id=a395.7>menn sem nú vóro nefnder, hverr með sína skip-verja, leitaðu til <anchor id=a395.8>braut-siglingar, þegar (es) Óláfr konungr vas komenn norðan af <anchor id=a395.9>Hálogalande; þvi at þeim vas sagt, at konungr nauðgaðe alla <anchor id=a395.10>menn til Cristne. L&aolig;gðo heiðingjar þegar út or &aoacute;nne, es konungr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a395.11>vas komenn til b&oeacute;jarens; siglðo þeir út efter firðe. Því næst geck <anchor id=a395.12>þeim veðr í þrá, ok rak þá inn aftr under Níðar-holm. Þetta vas <anchor id=a395.13>sagt Óláfe konunge, at Íslendingar l&aoacute;go út under Holme nockorom <anchor id=a395.14>skipom, ok vóro aller heiðner, ok vildo flýja fund hans. Konungr <anchor id=a395.15>sende þegar menn út til þeirra, ok bannaðe þeim braut-ferð, ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a395.16>bað þá leggja inn til b&oeacute;jar. Þeir g&aolig;rðo svá; en b&aoacute;ro ecke af <anchor id=a395.17>skipom sínom.&mdash;Í þann tíma kómo af Íslande g&aolig;fger menn ok <anchor id=a395.18>mikels-verðer, þeir es við Cristne h&aolig;fðo teket af Þangbrande preste, <anchor id=a395.19>Gizorr Hvíte ok Hialte Skeggja son or Þiórsár-dale (<hi lang=en-UK>here follows <anchor id=a395.20>the episode of Hialte</hi>).]<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>


<p n=7.1><anchor id=a395.21><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Í því bile kom Þangbrandr prestr af Íslande til konungs, <anchor id=a395.22>ok sagðe hvern fiánd-skap menn h&aolig;fðo þar við hann <anchor id=a395.23>lýst; ok kallaðe &oelig;nga v&aoacute;n at Cristne m&oelig;nde þar við gangasc. Þá <anchor id=a395.24>varð konungr svá reiðr, at hann lét taka marga Íslenzka menn ok <anchor id=a396.1><pb id=pb396 n=396>setja í iárn<note place=apparatus id=an396.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> iann, vell.</note>; hét sumom drápe, en sumom meizlom; en sumer vóro <anchor id=a396.2>rænter; sagðe konungr at hann skylde þá gialda þeim þat <hi>h</hi>verso<note place=apparatus id=an396.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> þverso, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a396.3>úvirðilega feðr þeirra tóko á Íslande hans &oelig;rendom. Þeir Hialte <anchor id=a396.4>ok Gizorr b&aoacute;ðo þá fyrer m&aolig;nnom, sagðo<note place=apparatus id=an396.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> sagðe, vell.</note> at konungr hafðe þat <anchor id=a396.5>mællt, at menn skyldo ecki þat hafa til saka g&oelig;rt áðr, ef þeir vilde<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a396.6>skírasc láta, at eige skylde frið hafa. Gizorr talðe frændseme við <anchor id=a396.7>konung&mdash;Álof, móðer hans, vas dótter B&aolig;ðvars hersess, Víkinga-Kára <anchor id=a396.8>sonar; en Ástríðr, móðer Óláfs konungs, vas dótter Eiriks, <anchor id=a396.9>bróðor B&aolig;ðvars&mdash;Gizorr sagðe at hónom þótte v&aoacute;n at Cristne <anchor id=a396.10>m&oelig;nde við gangasc á Íslande, ef r&aoacute;ðom være at faret. &lsquo;En Þangbrandr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a396.11>fór þar sem her heldr úspaklega; drap hann þar menn <anchor id=a396.12>nockora; ok þótte m&aolig;nnom hart at taka þat af útlendom manne.&rsquo; <anchor id=a396.13>Óláfr konungr seger: &lsquo;Aller menn skolo frið hafa, ef it<note place=apparatus id=an396.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>it]</ab> þit, vell.</note> Hialte <anchor id=a396.14>bindezc fyrer, at Cristnen gangesc við á Íslande; en taka mon-ek í <anchor id=a396.15>gísling þá menn es mer þickja bazt menter af Íslendingom, þar til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a396.16>es reynt es hverso þetta mál ferr.&rsquo;&mdash;Til þessa nefnde konungr Ceartan <anchor id=a396.17>Óláfs son; Halldór son Goðmundar Ríka; Kolbein son Þórðar <anchor id=a396.18>Freys-Goða, bróðor Brenno-Flosa; Sverting son Rúnolfs Goða. <anchor id=a396.19>Þá mælte maðr, es Svertings vas geteð: &lsquo;Úverðogr es Svertingr <anchor id=a396.20>þess, at Hialte veite hónom í orðom, þvi<note place=apparatus id=an396.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þvi]</ab> om. vell.</note> at faðer hans sótte<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a396.21>Hialta um sakleyse.&rsquo; Þangbrandr svarar: &lsquo;Oft mun þat lýsasc, at <anchor id=a396.22>Hialte mon betr hafa, an þeir es til mótz<note place=apparatus id=an396.6><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> moðz, vell.</note> ero; ok takeð ér, herra, <anchor id=a397.1><pb id=pb397 n=397>vel þá Hialta ok Gizor þvi at þeir launa oft góðo ílla hlute.&rsquo; Þesso <anchor id=a397.2>iátto þeir Hialte ok Gizorr, at flytja konungs &oelig;rende á Íslande. <anchor id=a397.3>En efter þat vóro aller Íslenzker menn leyster ok skírðer, þeir <anchor id=a397.4>sem þar vóro.

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a397.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Óláfr konungr veitte Hallfr&oelig;ðe goð-sifjar, þvi at hann vilde<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a397.6>eige láta skírasc ella&mdash;þá kallaðe konungr hann Vandræða-skálld, <anchor id=a397.7>ok gaf hónom sverð at nafn-feste. Gizorr ok Hialte<note place=apparatus id=an397.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>G. ok H.]</ab> thus here, Cd.</note> vóro með <anchor id=a397.8>konunge um vetrenn, ok sat Gizorr fyr á-dryckjo konungs, innarr <anchor id=a397.9>an lender menn. Með konunge vóro ok gíslar ener Íslenzko í <anchor id=a397.10>góðo yferlæte.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>


<p n=8.1><anchor id=a397.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Um váret bioggo þeir Hialte ok Gizorr skip sítt til <anchor id=a397.12>Íslannz; marger menn l&aolig;tto þess Hialta; en hann <anchor id=a397.13>gaf ser ecki um þat.<note place=apparatus id=an397.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>um þat]</ab> <foreign lang=en-UK>B&ast; (O) here inserts episode on Sverting, from Laxdæla or some other extraneous relation:</foreign> Svertingr bió þá skip sítt ... fór Svertingr hverge at sinne.</note>

<p><anchor id=a397.14>Þat sumar fór Óláfr konungr or lande suðr til Vindlannz. Þá <anchor id=a397.15>sende hann ok Leif Eiriks son til Gr&oeacute;na-lannz at boða þar trú.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a397.16>Þá fann Leifr Vínland et Góða. Hann fann ok menn á skip-flake <anchor id=a397.17>í hafe&mdash;því vas hann kallaðr Leifr enn Heppne.

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a397.18><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hialte ok Gizorr<note place=apparatus id=an397.3><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Giz. ok H., Cd.</note> kómo þann dag fyr Durholma-ós es Brenno-Flose <anchor id=a397.19>reið um Arnar-stacks-heiðe til Alþingess: þá spurðe hann af <anchor id=a397.20>þeim m&aolig;nnom es til þeirra h&aolig;fðo roet, at Kolbeinn, bróðer hans,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a397.21>vas tekenn í gísling; ok allt um &oelig;rende þeirra Hialta; ok sagðe <anchor id=a398.1><pb id=pb398 n=398>hann þau tíðende til Alþingess. Þeir tóko þann sama dag Vest&shy;manna-eyjar, <anchor id=a398.2>ok l&aolig;gðo skip sítt við H&oelig;rga-eyre: þar b&aoacute;ro þeir <anchor id=a398.3>f&aolig;t sín á land, ok kirkjo-við þann es Óláfr konungr hafðe láteð <anchor id=a398.4>h&oelig;ggva<note place=apparatus id=an398.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>h&oelig;ggva]</ab> öxa, B&ast; (O).</note>; ok mælte svá fyrer, at kirkjona skylde þar reisa sem þeir <anchor id=a398.5>skyte bryggjom á land. Áðr kirkjan vas reist, vas hlutað um<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a398.6>hv&aoacute;rom-megen vágsens standa skylde; ok hlautzc fyr norðan&mdash;þar <anchor id=a398.7>vóro áðr blót ok h&oelig;rgar. En er þeir h&aolig;fðo dvalzc tvá daga í <anchor id=a398.8>eyjonom, ok reistan laup kirkjonnar, þá fóro þeir þaðan, ok tóko <anchor id=a398.9>Eyja-sand<note place=apparatus id=an398.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Thus (en er þeir Gizor ... sand) B&ast; (O); þeir vóro tvær nætr í Eyjonom áðr þeir fóro inn á land: <foreign lang=en-UK>They were two nights in the isles before they went into the mainland.&mdash;Cd.</foreign></note> þann sama dag. Þat vas þann dag es menn riðo á þing. <anchor id=a398.10>Þeir fengo &oelig;ngan farar-greiða né reið-skióta fyr austan Rang-&aoacute;;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a398.11>þvi at þar s&aoacute;to þing-menn Rúnolfs í hverjo húse. Þeir gengo þar <anchor id=a398.12>til es þeir kómo í Háf til Skeggja Ásgautz<note place=apparatus id=an398.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ásgautz]</ab> B&ast;; Iokurs, Cd. (John Erlendsson).</note> sonar; hann feck þeim <anchor id=a398.13>hesta til þings; en Þórvaldr, son hans, vas áðr heiman riðenn, es <anchor id=a398.14>átte Col-torfo systor Hialta. En es þeir kómo í Laugar-dal, fengo <anchor id=a398.15>þeir þat af Hialta, at hann vas efter með tolfta mann, þvi at hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a398.16>vas sekr fiorbaugs-maðr.

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a398.17><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þeir Gizorr riðo þar til es þeir kómo til Vellan-kotlo við <anchor id=a398.18>Olfus-vatn: þá g&oelig;rðo þeir orð til Alþingess, at viner þeirra ok <anchor id=a398.19>venzla-menn skyldo ríða í mót þeim. Þeir h&aolig;fðo þá spurt at <anchor id=a398.20>óviner þeirra ætloðo at verja þeim þing-v&aolig;llenn. En áðr þeir riðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a398.21>frá Vellan-k&aolig;tlo, kómo þeir Hialte þar; ok vóro þá frændr þeirra <anchor id=a398.22>ok viner komner í móte þeim; riðo þeir þá á þing með miklom <anchor id=a399.1><pb id=pb399 n=399>flocke, ok til búðar Ásgríms Elliða-Gríms sonar, systor-sonar <anchor id=a399.2>Gizorar. Þá hliópo ener heiðno menn saman með al-væpne; ok <anchor id=a399.3>hafðe stór(um)<note place=apparatus id=an399.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> storn&apos;, vell.</note> ner at þeir mundo berjasc; en þó vóro þeir es <anchor id=a399.4>skirra vildo vandræðom, þó at eige være Cristner. Þórmóðr hét <anchor id=a399.5>prestr, sá es Óláfr konungr hafðe fenget þeim Hialta ok Gizore.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a399.6>Hann s&oelig;ng messo um dagenn efter á Giá-backa upp frá<note place=apparatus id=an399.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>upp frá]</ab> hiá, B&ast; (O).</note> búð Vest&shy;firðinga. <anchor id=a399.7>Þaðan gengo þeir til L&aolig;gbergs: þar vóro siau menn <anchor id=a399.8>skrýdder. Þeir h&aolig;fðo crossa tvá, þá es nú ero í Skarðe<note place=apparatus id=an399.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Skarðenu, vell.; ok báro fyrer ser tvá crossa mikla þá ena somo sem nú ero í Skarðe eno ytra, B&ast; (O).</note> eno <anchor id=a399.9>Eystra<note place=apparatus id=an399.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Eystra]</ab> ýtra, B&ast; (O).</note>: merker annarr hæð Óláfs konungs; en annarr hæð Hialta <anchor id=a399.10>Skeggja sonar.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=8.4><anchor id=a399.11><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> At L&aolig;gberge vas allr þing-heimr. Þeir Hialte h&aolig;fðo reykelse <anchor id=a399.12>á glóð, ok kende svá í gegn vinde sem forvindis ilmenn: þá b&aoacute;ro <anchor id=a399.13>þeir Hialte ok Gizorr upp &oelig;rende sín vel ok skorolega; en þat <anchor id=a399.14>undraðo menn hverso snialler þeir vóro, ok hverso vel þeim <anchor id=a399.15>mæltesc. En svá mikel ógn fylgðe orðom þeirra, at enger óviner<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a399.16>þeirra þorðo at tala móte þeim. En þat g&oelig;rðesc þar, at annarr <anchor id=a399.17>maðr at &aolig;ðrom nefnde ser vátta, ok s&aolig;gðosc hvárer or l&aolig;gom við <anchor id=a399.18>aðra, ener Cristno menn ok ener heiðno.

<p n=8.5><anchor id=a399.19><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þá kom maðr hlaupande á þinget<note place=apparatus id=an399.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á þinget]</ab> add. B&ast; (O).</note> ok sagðe, at iarð-elldr vas <anchor id=a399.20>upp komenn í Olfuse, ok munde hann hlaupa á b&oeacute; Þóroz Goða.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a399.21>Þá tóko heiðner menn til orðz: &lsquo;Eige es undr í, at goðen reiðesc <anchor id=a400.1><pb id=pb400 n=400>t&aolig;lom slíkom.&rsquo; Þá mælte Snorre Goðe: &lsquo;Um hvat reiddosc goðen <anchor id=a400.2>þá es her brann hraunet es nú st&aolig;ndo ver á?&rsquo;<note place=apparatus id=an400.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Um hvat ... ver á]</ab> Hverjo voro goðin reið þá her brann iorðin er nú stondum ver, B&ast; (O) (less good).</note>

<p><anchor id=a400.3>Efter þat gengo menn frá til L&aolig;gberge.

<p n=8.6><anchor id=a400.4><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þá b&aoacute;ðo ener Cristno menn at Síðo-Hallr skylde segja l&aolig;g <anchor id=a400.5>þeirra upp, þau es Cristnenne skyldo fylgja. Hallr keypte h&aolig;lfo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a400.6>hundraðe silfrs at Þórgeire Goða, es þá hafðe L&aolig;gs&aolig;go, at hann <anchor id=a400.7>segðe upp l&aolig;g hvár-tvegge, Cristen ok heiðen; ok vas hann þá <anchor id=a400.8>enn eige skírðr.

<p><anchor id=a400.9>[B&ast; (O) <hi lang=en-UK>here adds</hi>&mdash;(Ok segiz svá at Hallr gaf hónom til halft <anchor id=a400.10>c silfrs) með þeim skildaga, at hann skylde hafa þau þriú orð í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a400.11>fram-burðe laganna, sem þeir Hialte, Gizorr, ok Hallr<note place=apparatus id=an400.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Hallr, G. oc Hialte, B&ast; (O).</note> s&aolig;gðo <anchor id=a400.12>hónom fyrer, hverso sem hann skipaðe &aolig;ðrom l&aolig;gom. Þat vas et <anchor id=a400.13>fyrsta orð, at aller menn skyldo Cristner vesa á Íslande ok skírn <anchor id=a400.14>taka þeir es áðr vóru ó-skírðer: þat var annat, at óheilog skyldu <anchor id=a400.15>vesa hof &aolig;ll ok skurðgoð: þat vas et þriðja, at fiorbaugs-garð<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a400.16>skylde varða blót &aolig;ll, ef vátt-næmd yrðe.]

<p><anchor id=a400.17>En þá es menn kómo í búðer lagðesc Þórgeirr niðr ok breidde <anchor id=a400.18>feld á h&aolig;foð ser, ok lá allan dag ok um nóttena, ok annan dagenn <anchor id=a400.19>til iam<hi>n</hi>-lengðar.

<p n=8.7><anchor id=a400.20><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Ener heiðno menn h&aolig;fðo þá stefno fiolmenna, ok tóko þat<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a400.21>ráð, at blóta tveimr m&aolig;nnom or hverjom fiórðunge; ok héto á <anchor id=a400.22>heiðen goð til þess, at þau léte eige Cristne ganga yfer landet.

<p><anchor id=a400.23>Þeir Hialte ok Gizorr &aoacute;tto aðra stefno við Cristna menn; ok létosc <anchor id=a400.24>þeir vilja hafa ok mann-blót iam-fiolmennt sem ener heiðno. Þeir <anchor id=a401.1><pb id=pb401 n=401>mælto svá: &lsquo;Heiðingjar blóta enom verstom m&aolig;nnom, ok hrinda <anchor id=a401.2>þeim fyrer bi&aolig;rg eða hamra; en ver skolom velja at mann-kostom <anchor id=a401.3>menn, ok kalla sigr-gi&aolig;f við Drótten várn Jesum Christum; skolo <anchor id=a401.4>ver lifa því betr ok synðvarr-ligar an áðr: ok mono vit Gizorr <anchor id=a401.5>ganga til fyrer várn fiórðung sigr-giafarennar.&rsquo; En fyrer Aust-firðinga-fiórðung<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a401.6>gengo þeir til, Hallr af Síðo, ok Þórleifr or Crossa-vík <anchor id=a401.7>fyr norðan Reyðar-fi&aolig;rð, hann vas stiúp-son Ásbiarnar Loðin-h&aolig;fða, <anchor id=a401.8>bróðer<note place=apparatus id=an401.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann vas ... bróðer]</ab> emend, according to Vápnfird. Saga and Ld. IV. 5. 3; Reyðar f. brodi Þórarens s. or seyðar f., vell.</note> Þórarens or Seyðar-firðe: Ingileif vas móðer þeirra.&mdash;Hónom <anchor id=a401.9>hafðe Digr-Ketill stefnt um Cristne at ráðe Brodd-Helga: <anchor id=a401.10>þá g&oelig;rðe veðr svá íllt, at Ketill varð því feginn at hann kom til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a401.11>Þórleifs um kveldet, ok hafðe þar góðan beina; af því féll stefnan.&mdash;En <anchor id=a401.12>or Norðlendinga-fiórðunge gengo þeir til sigr-giafarennar, <anchor id=a401.13>Hlenne enn Gamle, ok Þórvarðr son Spak-B&aolig;ðvars. En or <anchor id=a401.14>Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge, Gestr Oddleifs<note place=apparatus id=an401.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Olleifs, Cd.</note> son. Þá vas enge annarr <anchor id=a401.15>til. Þat líkaðe þeim Hialta ok Gizore ílla. Þá tók til orða Ormr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a401.16>Coðrans son&mdash;hann vas vistom á Gils-backa, þvi at Hermundr <anchor id=a401.17>Illoga son átte Gunnhilde dóttor hans: &lsquo;Verða munde maðr til <anchor id=a401.18>þessa, es Þórvaldr bróðer mínn enn Víðf&aolig;rle være samlendr við <anchor id=a401.19>mik. En nú mun ek til ganga ef ér vilet við mer taka.&rsquo; Þeir <anchor id=a401.20>i&aoacute;tto því; ok vas hann þá skírðr þegar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=8.8><anchor id=a401.21><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En um dagenn efter settesc Þórgeirr upp, ok g&oelig;rðe orð í <anchor id=a401.22>búðer at menn genge til L&aolig;gbergs. Ok es menn kómo til L&aolig;gbergs, <anchor id=a401.23>mælte hann&mdash;at hónom þótte þá komet í ú-vent efne á <anchor id=a401.24>landeno, es menn skolo eige hafa ein l&aolig;g á lande her; ok bað at <anchor id=a402.1><pb id=pb402 n=402>menn skyldo þat eige g&oelig;ra; sagðe at þar af mundo g&oelig;rasc bar&shy;dagar <anchor id=a402.2>ok ófriðr; ok munde þat ryðja til land-auðnar. Hann <anchor id=a402.3>sagðe ok frá því, at konungar þeir, es annarr hét Dagr&mdash;sá vas í <anchor id=a402.4>Danm&aolig;rko&mdash;en sá hét Tryggve es var í Norege: þeir h&aolig;fðo lenge <anchor id=a402.5>haldet stríð miðlim sín; ok þar til es lannz-menn n&aoacute;mo þá r&aoacute;ðom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a402.6>or hv&aoacute;ro-tveggja ríkeno; ok g&oelig;rðo frið miðlim þeirra, svá at þeir <anchor id=a402.7>vildo eige. En þat ráð gafsc svá, at þeir sendosc giafar á miðlim <anchor id=a402.8>á fára vetra freste; ok hélsc þeirra vingan meðan þeir lifðo báðer. <anchor id=a402.9>&lsquo;Ok þickc mer þat ráð, at láta þá eige ráða, es her gangasc með <anchor id=a402.10>mesto kappe í móte; ok miðlom svá m&aoacute;l miðlim þeirra, at hvárer-tveggja<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a402.11>hafe nockot til síns máls. En ver h&aolig;fom aller ein l&aolig;g ok <anchor id=a402.12>einn sið; því at þat mon satt vesa, ef ver slítom l&aolig;ogen, þá slíto ver <anchor id=a402.13>friðenn.&rsquo;

<p><anchor id=a402.14>Þórgeirr lauk svá t&aolig;lonne, at hvárer-tveggjo i&aoacute;tto því, at þau <anchor id=a402.15>l&aolig;g skylde halda es hann réðe upp at segja.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=8.9><anchor id=a402.16><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Þá vas þat upp-saga Þórgeirs, at aller menn skyldo vera <anchor id=a402.17>skírðer á Íslande, ok trua á einn Goð: en um barna út-burð ok <anchor id=a402.18>hrossa-át skolo haldasc en forno l&aolig;g. Menn skyldo blóta á laun, <anchor id=a402.19>ef vilde; en varða fiorbaugs-garð ef v&aoacute;ttom k&oeacute;me við.&mdash;Sú heiðne <anchor id=a402.20>vas af teken nockorom vetrom síðarr.<note place=apparatus id=an402.1><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> á fárra vetra freste vas þesse heiðne af numen með allra hofðingja ráðe, ok alþýðo samþycke, B&ast; (O).</note><ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p><anchor id=a402.21>[B&ast; (N).]&mdash;&lsquo;Hann sagðe þá upp um Dróttins-daga-halld, ok <anchor id=a402.22>f&aolig;sto-daga, Ióla-daga, ok Pasca-daga, ok allra enna st&oeacute;rsto hátíða.&rsquo;

<pb id=pb403 n=403><p n=8.10><anchor id=a403.1><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Aller Norðlendingar ok Sunnlendingar vóro skírðer í <anchor id=a403.2>Reykja-laugo í Laugar-dale, es þeir riðo af þinge; þvi at þeir <anchor id=a403.3>vildo eige fara í kalt vatn. Hialte mælte, es Rúnolfr vas skírðr:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a403.4>&lsquo;G&aolig;mlom kenno ver nú goða at geifla á salte.<note place=apparatus id=an403.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> goðanom ... salteno, Cd.</note>&rsquo;
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a403.5>Þat sumar vas skírðr allr þing-heimr es menn riðo heim. Flester<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a403.6>Vestan-menn vóro skírðer í Reykja-laugo í Syðra-Reykjar-dale. <anchor id=a403.7>Snorre Goðe kom mesto á leið við Vestfirðinga.<note place=apparatus id=an403.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Here ends the narrative in B&ast; (O).</note>

<p n=8.11><anchor id=a403.8><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Sumar þetta es Cristne vas í l&aolig;g teken á Íslande, vas liðet <anchor id=a403.9>frá Hollgan várs Herra Jesu Christi <hi rend=sc>m</hi> vetra.

<p n=8.12><anchor id=a403.10><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Þat sumar hvarf Óláfr konungr af Orme&apos;nom Langa suðr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a403.11>(við) Svolðr, iiij <hi>Idus</hi> Septembris. Þá hafðe hann vereð konungr <anchor id=a403.12>at Norege <hi rend=sc>v</hi> vetr. Efter hann tók ríke Eirikr iarl Hákonar son.


<p n=9.1><anchor id=a403.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Þeir Þórvaldr Coðrans son ok Stefner Þórgils son <anchor id=a403.14>fundosc efter hvarf Óláfs konungs. Þeir fóro báðer <anchor id=a403.15>saman víða um heimenn, ok allt út í Iorsala-heim; ok þaðan til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a403.16>Mikla-garz, ok svá til C&oelig;nu-garðz et eystra efter Dnepr<note place=apparatus id=an403.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Dnepr]</ab> emend.; Nepr, vell.</note>. Þórvaldr <anchor id=a403.17>andaðesc í Ruzia skamt<note place=apparatus id=an403.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> skampt, vell.</note> frá Palltesciu. Þar es hann grafenn í <anchor id=a403.18>fialle eino at kirkjo Johans<note place=apparatus id=an403.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Ioh&apos;s, vell.</note> Baptiste; ok kalla þeir hann helgan. <anchor id=a403.19>Svá seger Brandr enn Víðf&aolig;rle:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a403.20>Hefi-ek þar ... komeð es Þórvalde<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a403.21>Coðrans syne Christr hvílðar lér:
    <pb id=pb404 n=404><l><anchor id=a404.1>þar es hann grafenn í há-fialle
    <l><anchor id=a404.2>upp at Dnapre í<note place=apparatus id=an404.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at Dnapre í]</ab> emend.; í drafni at, vell. (i. e. drapne), by way of metathesis. See p. 412 n.</note> Iohans kirkju.
</lg>

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a404.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Stefner fór þá norðr í Danm&aolig;rk. En es hann kom í Danm&aolig;rk, <anchor id=a404.4>kvað hann víso þessa:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a404.5>Monkað-ek nefna&mdash;nær man-ek stefna;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a404.6>Niðr-biúgt es nef á níðinge&mdash;
    <l><anchor id=a404.7>Þann es Svein konung sveik or lande,
    <l><anchor id=a404.8>Ok Tryggvason á tálar dró.
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a404.9>Á þeirre víso þóttesc Sigvalde iarl kenna mark sítt; ok fyrer þá <anchor id=a404.10>s&aolig;k lét hann drepa Stefne.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p><anchor id=a404.11>Svá hefer Are enn Gamle sagt:&mdash;


<p n=10.1><anchor id=a404.12><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gizorr</hi> enn Hvíte bió í H&aolig;fða áðr hann g&oelig;rðe b&oeacute; <anchor id=a404.13>í Scála-holte, ok f&oeacute;rðe þangat bú sítt. Hann lagðe <anchor id=a404.14>allan hug á at styrkja Cristnena. Hann sende Ísleif son sínn suðr <anchor id=a404.15>í Saxland, ok geck þar í scóla í borg þeirre er Herfurða<note place=apparatus id=an404.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> Blank left for the name in the vellum.</note> heiter.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a404.16>En es hann kom til Íslannz, feck hann Dollo Þórvallz dóttor, ok <anchor id=a404.17>vas þeirra son Gizorr, ok Teitr enn Margláte í Hauka-dal<hi>e</hi>, ok <anchor id=a404.18>Þórvaldr.

<p n=10.2 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a404.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Her vóro fyrst útlender byscopar, ok kendo kenningar.

<p rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a404.20>En es lannz-menn visso hverso ágætr clerkr Ísleifr vas, báðo landz-menn hann<note place=apparatus id=an404.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> l., vell.</note>,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a404.21>at hann f&oelig;re útan ok léte vígjasc til byscops; ok þat veitte hann þeim. Þá vas <anchor id=a404.22>hann L. at aldre es hann vas til byscops vígðr. Þá vas Leo <hi>nonus pp</hi>. Þá <anchor id=a405.1><pb id=pb405 n=405>vas hann enn næsta vetr eftr í Norege, ok fór síðan til Íslannz, ok vas iiij vettr <anchor id=a405.2>ok xx byscop. Hann lærðe marga ágæta menn ok lét vígja til presta; en af <anchor id=a405.3>þeim urðo síðan ij byscopar, Joan Ogmundar<note place=apparatus id=an405.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Ion O&mmacr;undar, vell.</note> son enn Helge, ok Kolr Víkverja <anchor id=a405.4>byscop. Ísleifr byscop andaðesc í Scálaholte iij nonas Iulij. Þat vas á Dróttens <anchor id=a405.5>dege. Þá hafðe hann iiij vetr ok xx byscop veret. Þá vóro lxxx vetra liðner frá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a405.6>hvarfe Óláfs konungs Tryggva sonar. <hi>Are enn Fróðe stóð yfer grefte hans xij <anchor id=a405.7>vetra gamall, es flest hefer sagt frá þessom tíðendom es her ero ritoð.</hi>

<p n=10.3 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a405.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Efter andlát Ísleifs byscops, báðo landz-menn Gizor son hans, at hann skylde <anchor id=a405.9>vígjasc til byscops. Hann fór útan, ok vas vígðr til byscops ij vetrom efter <anchor id=a405.10>andlát Ísleifs byscops, á dogom Óláfs konungs Kyrra Noregs konungs. Þá vas<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a405.11>Gregorius septimus<note place=apparatus id=an405.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> seftimus, vell.</note> pp. í Roma. Gizorr vas enn nesta vetr efter víxlo sína í Danmork; <anchor id=a405.12>en fór til Íslannz it nesta sumar efter. En es hann hafðe einn vetr á Íslande <anchor id=a405.13>veret tók Márkus Skeggja son Logsogo.&mdash;<hi>Hann hefer vitrastr veret Log</hi>(<hi>sogo</hi>) <anchor id=a405.14><hi>manna á Íslande annarr an Skafte.</hi>

<p n=10.4 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a405.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Gizorr byscop vas svá ást-sæll af landz-monnom, at hverr maðr vilde hans<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a405.16>boðe ok banne hlýða. En af ást-sælð Gizorar byscops ok um-tolom Sæmundar <anchor id=a405.17>prestz <hi>ens Fróða&mdash;es baztr clerkr hefer veret á Íslande</hi>&mdash;ok um<hi>b</hi>ráðom Márkus <anchor id=a405.18>Logsogo-mannz, ok<note place=apparatus id=an405.3><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Logsogo-mannz, ok]</ab> here ends the last vell. leaf. vas þat] at þat var, Cd.</note> fleire hofðingja vas þat í log teket, at aller menn tolðo ok <anchor id=a405.19>virðo fé sítt, ok svorðo eið at rétt være, hvárt sem vas í londom eða lausom aurom, <anchor id=a405.20>ok g&oelig;rðo tiund af. Þat es miket mark til þess hverso lannz-menn vóro hlýðner<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a405.21>þeim manne es því kom til leiðar, at allt landet vas virt, ok allt fé þat es á því vas, <anchor id=a405.22>ok log-teket at svá skylde vesa meðan landet være bygt.

<p n=10.5 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a405.23><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Gizorr byscop lagðe ok log á þat, at stóll byscops þess es á Íslande være, <anchor id=a405.24>skylde vesa í Scála-holte; ok lagðe þar til stólsens landet heima þar, ok morg onnor <anchor id=a405.25>auðæve, bæðe í lande ok lausom eyre. En þá es hónom þótte sá staðr orðenn svá<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a405.26>ríkr sem hann vilde, þá gaf hann meirr an fiórðung byscops-dóms síns til þess at <anchor id=a405.27>heldr være ij byscops stólar á Íslande an einn; svá sem Norðlendingar báðo <anchor id=a405.28>hann.

<p n=10.6 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a405.29><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> En hann hafðe áðr láteð telja b&oelig;ndr alla á Íslande; ok vóro þá: Í Austfirðinga <anchor id=a405.30>fiórðunge dcc heil; en í Sunnlendinga fiórðunge dd; en í Vestfirðinga fiórðunge<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a405.31>ix c; en í Norðlendinga fiórðunge xii (c)&mdash;ok vóro þeir einer talðer es þingfarar-kaupe <anchor id=a405.32>átto at gegna.

<p n=10.7 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a405.33><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þá es Gizorr byscop hafðe xxv vetr veret byscop, þá tók Gunnarr<note place=apparatus id=an405.4><ab type=lineNumRef>33.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gunnarr]</ab> Markus, Cd.</note> Ulfheðins <anchor id=a405.34>son logsogo; en Márkus vas þá andaðr.<note place=apparatus id=an405.5><ab type=lineNumRef>34.</ab> Cd. here omits: þá tók logsogo Bergþórr Hrafn son.</note> Ok et fyrsta sumar es hann sagðe log <anchor id=a405.35>upp, vas nýmæle þat g&oelig;rt, at um vetrenn efter skylde rita logen at Hafliða Márs<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a405.36>sonar, ok um<hi>b</hi>ráðe Bergþórs ok annarra vitra manna; ok skyldo þeir g&oelig;ra nýmæle <anchor id=a405.37>þau oll, es þeim þ&oeacute;tte þau betre an en forno log; ok skylde þau segja upp et næsta <anchor id=a405.38>sumar efter; ok þau oll haldasc, es meire hlutr manna mælte eige móte. Þá vas <anchor id=a405.39>ritaðr Víg-slóðe ok mart annat í logom, ok leset upp um sumaret efter í Logrétto; ok <anchor id=a405.40>líkaðe þat ollom vel.&mdash;Þá vas byscop fert&oelig;gr es hann vas til byscops vígðr. En<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a405.41>þá es hann hafðe iiij vetr ok xx byscop veret, vas Joan<note place=apparatus id=an405.6><ab type=lineNumRef>41.</ab> Ion, Cd.</note> vígðr til byscops son <anchor id=a405.42>O<hi>g</hi>mundar ok Þórgerðar, Egils dóttor, Hallz sonar af Síðo. Þá hafðe Ioan iiij <anchor id=a405.43>vetr ens setta tigar. Hann vas fyrstr byscop at Hólom í Hialta-dal<hi>e</hi>.


<p n=10.8><anchor id=a405.44><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Gizorr byscop friðaðe svá vel landet, at þá urðo engar stór-deilor <anchor id=a405.45>með h&aolig;fðingjom; en vápna-burðr lagðesc miok niðr. Þá<ab type=lineNum>45</ab> <anchor id=a406.1><pb id=pb406 n=406>vóro flester virðinga-menn lærðer, ok vígðer til presta, þó at h&aolig;fðingjar <anchor id=a406.2>være. Svá sem vas:

<p><anchor id=a406.3>Hallr, <hi>suðr</hi><note place=apparatus id=an406.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> suðr (i. e. in Scalholt diocese) added.</note>, Teitz son í Hauka-dale; ok Sæmundr enn Fróðe; <anchor id=a406.4>Magnús Þórðar son í Reykja-holte; Simon Iorundar son í B&oeacute;e; <anchor id=a406.5>Goðmundr son Brannz í Hiarðar-holte; Are enn Fróðe; Inge-mundr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a406.6>Einars son á Hólom.

<p><anchor id=a406.7>Ketill, <hi>norðr</hi>, Þórsteins son á M&aolig;ðro-v&aolig;llom; ok Ketill Goðmundar <anchor id=a406.8>son; Jóan prestr Þórvarz son.&mdash;Ok marger aðrer<note place=apparatus id=an406.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> norðr (i. e. Holar diocese).</note>, þó at <anchor id=a406.9>eige sé ritaðer.


<p n=10.9 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a406.10><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Gizorr byscop lét vígja Þórlák, son Rúnolfs Þórláks sonar, til byscops at ser<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a406.11>lifanda&mdash;þá vas Þórlákr ii vetrom meirr an þrít&oelig;gr&mdash;Gizorr byscop andaðesc <anchor id=a406.12>í Scála-holte þá es hann hafðe veret byscop xxx<note place=apparatus id=an406.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> xxx, vi, and xxx, Cd.</note> ára ok vi ár. Þat vas xxx <anchor id=a406.13>nátta síðarr an Þórlákr byscop vas vígðr. Þat vas enn þriðja dag í viko, v <anchor id=a406.14>kal. Junij. Á því áre andaðesc Paskalis Papa, ok Kirjalax Girkja<note place=apparatus id=an406.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Grikja, Cd.</note> konungr; ok <anchor id=a406.15>Balldvin Iorsala konungr; ok Arnaldus Patriarki í Jerusalem; ok Philippus Svia<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a406.16>konungr. <hi>Þá hafðe Ísland bygt veret cc vetra tólf-r&oelig;ð<note place=apparatus id=an406.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Emend.; tí-r&oelig;ð, Cd.</note>, annat í heiðne, en annat <anchor id=a406.17>í Cristne.</hi> Þá vas liðet frá Holldgan Dróttens várs Herra Jesu Christi m c xviij ár.


<p n=10.10><anchor id=a406.18><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Þá es Gizorr byscop andaðesc vóro þesser mester h&aolig;fðingjar <anchor id=a406.19>á Íslande:

<p><anchor id=a406.20>Hafliðe Márs son, <hi>norðr</hi>; ok syner Ásbiarnar, Arnórs sonar, í<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a406.21>Skaga-firðe; Þórgeirr Halla son; ok Ketill prestr Þórsteins son.

<p><anchor id=a406.22>En <hi>austr,</hi> Gizorr Einars son; Sigmundr Þórgils son;&mdash;hann <anchor id=a406.23>andaðesc á því Áre í Rúm-f&aolig;r.

<p><anchor id=a406.24>En <hi>suðr</hi>, Hallr Teitz son; Skúle Egils son<corr>.</corr>

<p><anchor id=a406.25>En <hi>vestr,</hi> Styrmer <hi>H</hi>reins son; Halldórr Egils son; Þórgils<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a406.26>Odda<note place=apparatus id=an406.6><ab type=lineNumRef>26.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Odda]</ab> Oddz, Cd. Gils son] thus Biorn o&apos; Skarðsa; Egils s., Cd.</note> son; Þórðr Gils son; Þórðr Þórvallz son í Vatz-firðe.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<!-- TRANSLATION OF THE STORY OF THE CHRISTIANISING -->


<pb id=pb376a n=376>
<div2 id=en.cristne lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">

<p n=0.1><hi>Here beginneth the Story of the Christianising [of Iceland]</hi>.

<p n=0.2>Now beginneth how Christendom came to Iceland&mdash;

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a man named Thor-wald, son of Codran, brother&apos;s son of Atle the Strong. They [Codran and Atle] were sons of Eilif Erne, the son of Bard o&apos; Al, the son of Cetil the Fox, the son of Skide the Old. Cod-ran dwelt at Gil-water in Water-dale, and was a man of birth. Thor-wald his son went abroad, and was first a-warring; but the share of the booty that he won he laid out in ransoming men taken captive in war, all that he did not need to keep for his own maintenance; and for such doings he became renowned and well-beloved.

<p>Thor-wald travelled far in the Southern lands. South in Sax-land he met a bishop called Frederick, and took baptism and the true faith at his hands, and was with him for a while. Thor-wald asked the bishop to journey with him to Iceland, to baptize his father and mother and those of the rest of his kindred who would follow his counsel, and the bishop granted it to him.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Bishop Frederick and Thor-wald came to Iceland in the summer when the land had been settled one-hundred-and-seven winters. Thor-kell Moon held the speakership at that time.

<p n=1.2.2>And the mightiest chiefs in the land at that time were Ey-wolf Wal-gerd&apos;s son, in the <hi rend=sc>North</hi>, and Wiga-Glum, Arnor Carline-neb, Thor-ward son of Bead-war the Sage, Starre and his brothers in God-dales, <pb id=pb377a n=377>Thor-kell Crafla in Water-dale; and in the <hi rend=sc>West</hi> were these: Are Mar&apos;s son, As-gar Cnatt&apos;s son, Ey-wolf the Gray, Guest the Sage, An-laf Peacock, Slaughter Styr, Snorre gode who was then 18 years old, and had taken up his abode at Holy-fell, Thor-stan Egil&apos;s son. And in the <hi rend=sc>South</hi>, Illuge the Red, Thor-kell Moon and Thor-ord the priest, Gizor the White, As-grim the son of Ellida-grim, Sholto Scegge&apos;s son, Wal-gard o&apos; Temple, Run-wolf Wolf&apos;s son, and the sons of Ern-ulf o&apos; Shaw. And in the <hi rend=sc>East</hi>, the sons of Thord the gode <hi>or</hi> priest of Frey, Hall o&apos; Side, Helge As-beorn&apos;s son, Wiga-Bearne, and Geite.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> It is told that when the bishop and Thor-wald journeyed into the North-land-men&apos;s Quarter, and Thor-wald preached the faith to men,&mdash;for the bishop did not understand the Northern tongue at that time, but Thor-wald set forth God&apos;s message boldly, but most men were little moved by their words,&mdash;that Ean-wend the Christian, the son of Thor-gils of Reek-dale, the son of Grenjad, received the faith, and Hlenne the Old, the son of Orm Mail-back, and Thor-ward at Ridge in Shelty-dale, the son of Bead-war the Sage, and Ey-wolf Wal-gerd&apos;s son, had himself prime-signed.

<p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> The bishop and Thor-wald, with thirteen men, passed the first winter with Codran at Gil-water. Thor-wald asked his father to be baptized, but he was in no haste to do so. There stood a stone at Gil-water, which he and his kindred had been wont to worship, saying that <pb id=pb378a n=378>their Steward <hi>or</hi> Ancestor dwelt therein. Codran said that he would not let himself be baptized till he knew which was the mightier, the bishop or the ancestor in the stone. Whereupon the bishop went to the stone and sang over it till it burst asunder, and then Codran thought he could perceive that the ancestor was overcome. Then he let himself be baptized and all his household with him, save Orm, his son, who would not receive the faith, and went away southward into Borg-frith and bought him land in Hwan-eyre.

<p n=1.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Orm had to wife Thor-ware, the daughter of Ozor and of Bera, the daughter of Egil, the son of Scald-Grim. Their daughter was Yng-wild, whom Her-mund Illuge&apos;s son had to wife. Afterwards Orm had to wife Geir-laug daughter of Stan-mood o&apos; Deep-dale. Their daughter was Bera, whom Scule Thor-stan&apos;s son had to wife.


<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> The bishop and Thor-wald took up their abode at Beck-moot in Withe-dale, and dwelt there four winters. They journeyed far and wide in Iceland preaching the faith. The bishop and Thor-wald were harvest-guests with An-laf at Hawk-gill in Water-dale. Thor-kell Crafla was there at the time, and many other men; and there came thither two bear-sarks, both named Hawk; they would be always cowing people, and went about howling, and walked <hi>or</hi> waded through fires. Then men asked the bishop to overcome them. Whereupon the bishop hallowed the fire before they walked through, and then they got much burnt, and thereupon men set upon them and slew them, and their bodies were borne up to the fell hard by the gill that was afterwards <pb id=pb379a n=379>called Hawk-gill. Thereupon Thor-kell Crafla had himself prime-signed, but many men who heard these tidings were baptized.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Thor-wald and the bishop journeyed into the West-frith-men&apos;s Quarter to preach the faith. About the time of the All-thing they came to the house of Thor-arin Fylsenni at Hwam <hi>or</hi> Combe, and he was at the All-moot at the time, but his wife Frid-gerd, the daughter of Thord o&apos; Head, and their son Scegge were at home. Thor-wald preached the faith there before men; but Frid-gerd was in the temple sacrificing all the while, and each of them could hear what the other said, and the boy Scegge was laughing at them. Then Thor-wald recited these verses:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>I walked with the halidom, no man listened to me,
    <l>I got mockery from the priest&apos;s son, the sprinkler of the divining-rod,
    <l>The old house-wife shrieked against me ...
    <l>The priestess, God lame her ...
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79.]


<p n=2.2.1>Men would not let them be baptized by reason of their words in the West-frith-men&apos;s Quarter as far as is known, but in the North-land-men&apos;s Quarter many men abandoned their sacrifices and broke their idols, and some would not pay temple-toll.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Thor-ward, son of Bod-war <hi>or</hi> Bead-were the Sage, let build a church at his dwelling in Ridge, which greatly displeased them that were heathen. There was a man called Clauve, the son of Thor-wald, son of Ref of Bard. He was a chief. He was much displeased with Thor-wald for what he had done; and he went to see Arn-grim, Thor-ward&apos;s brother, and gave him his choice either to burn the church or slay the priest whom the bishop had set there. Then Arn-grim answered, &lsquo;I <pb id=pb380a n=380>will not let any of my friends do the priest any harm, for my brother has cruelly avenged smaller wrongs; but I reckon it a good plan to burn the church; nevertheless I will not meddle with it myself.&rsquo; A little after this Clauve came over by night, and nine men in his company, to try and burn the church; but when they came to the churchyard they beheld as it were fire blowing out of the church at every window, and they went off, for they beheld the whole church as it were full of fire. But when they heard that the church was not burnt, they came over a second night and Arn-grim with them, meaning to burn the church. And when they had broken into the church, he kindled a fire there with dry mountain beech, but the fire was slow to kindle. Then he lay down, and blew into the church over the threshold. Then there came an arrow in the floor close past his head, and another between his shirt and his sides. Then he sprang up, saying that he would not wait for the third, and with that he went home. Now this church was built sixteen winters before Christendom was made law in Iceland, and it was standing when bishop Botolf was at Holar [1238&ndash;1246], although it had only been repaired with a thatching of turves.

<p n=2.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Frederick and Thor-wald journeyed to the Moot, and the bishop asked Thor-wald to preach the faith before men at the Hill of Laws, he standing by while Thor-wald spoke. And a certain gentleman answered him with many and ill words, Hedin of Swal-bard in Ey-frith. This Hedin was the son of Thor-biorn, Scage&apos;s son, the son of Shafto. He had to wife Ragn-heid, the step-daughter and brother&apos;s daughter of <pb id=pb381a n=381>Ey-wolf, Walgerd&apos;s son. They asked poets to lampoon Thor-wald and the bishop. And this was what was composed:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The bishop has borne nine bairns ava&apos;,
    <l>Thor-wald&apos;s the father of them a&apos;.
</lg>


<p>For this lampoon Thor-wald slew two men which had made the lampoon.

<p n=2.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> And when Thor-wald had slain the poets, he went to the bishop to tell him what he had done. The bishop was sitting indoors looking at his book, and before Thor-wald walked in, there came two drops of blood on the book before the bishop. The bishop knew at once that this was some omen. And when Thor-wald came to him he said, &lsquo;Either thou hast committed manslaughter or hast it in thy mind to do so.&rsquo; Thor-wald told him what he had done. The bishop said, &lsquo;Why didst thou do so?&rsquo; Thor-wald answered, &lsquo;I could not bear them to call us <hi>raga</hi>.&rsquo; Said the bishop, &lsquo;That was but a little trial to bear, though they tell this lie, that thou hast children; but thou hast taken their words in the worst way, for I might well bear thy children if thou had any: a Christian man should not seek to avenge himself, though he were hatefully reviled, but rather endure contumely and insult for God&apos;s sake.&rsquo;

<p n=2.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> And when Thor-wald and the bishop wished to ride to Heron&apos;s-ness Moot, then certain of the heathen went to meet them, and fought <pb id=pb382a n=382>against them with stones, so that they could not go on their way [to the Moot]. And after this they were outlawed according to the heathen laws. Then the bishop spake: &lsquo;Now is fulfilled what my mother dreamed long ago, that she thought she had found wolf&apos;s hair on my head, for now we are hunted and chased like devouring wolves.&rsquo;

<p>And the same summer after the All-thing, the chiefs gathered a company and rode forth with 200 men, meaning to burn the bishop in the house. They baited their horses before they rode up to the homestead at Leck-moot, but when they were about to mount a flock of birds got up close to them, and with that their steeds got frightened, and they fell off their backs. Some broke their legs and some their arms, or were hurt by their own weapons, and some men&apos;s horses ran away, and so they went back home again. The bishop and his friends were not aware of this rising upon them before it was over. At that time they had been three winters at Leck-moot, and they abode there one winter later.

<p n=2.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> After this they went abroad. And when they came to Norway they put into a certain haven, and it came to pass that while they were there Hedin came from Iceland and put into the same haven, and straightway landed and went up to the shaw to hew wood. And when Thor-wald knew of it, he went up with his thrall and had him slain there. But when the bishop came to know of it he said that they must break up their partnership because he was so revengeful. And the bishop journeyed southward into Saxony, and there he died, and he is <pb id=pb383a n=383>a man of true saintliness. But Thor-wald was then first <hi>engaged</hi> in merchant voyages for a while.



<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> In the days of king Harold Gormsson, Albertus bishop of Bremen came to Ar-oyce in Jutland, and set himself in the bishop&apos;s see there. The name of his clerk was Thang-brand, the son of Willi-bald the gerefa of Bremen. And when Thang-brand was grown up, Hugbert, bishop of Canterbury, asked his brother Albertus to come and see him. At the banquet Hugbert gave gifts to Albertus and all his company. And the bishop said to Thang-brand, &lsquo;Thou art in manners as a knight, wherefore I give thee a shield, and there is a cross with the image of our Lord marked on it, that marks thy clerkship.&rsquo;

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> A little while after this Thang-brand met An-laf Tryggvason in Wend-land. An-laf asked him, &lsquo;Whom do ye Christian men worship suffering on the cross?&rsquo; Thang-brand answered, &lsquo;Our Lord Jesus Christ.&rsquo; The king asks, &lsquo;Why suffered he, and what evil had he done?&rsquo; Then Thang-brand told king An-laf carefully at length of the passion of our Lord and the tokens of the cross. Then the king wished to get the shield, and Thang-brand gave him the shield, and the king gave him the worth of the shield in burnt silver, and said, &lsquo;If thou need any help or maintenance, then come to me, and I will repay thee for the shield.&rsquo;

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Somewhat later king An-laf had himself baptized in the Scillies off Ireland.

<p>Thang-brand bought a fair Irish maid with his silver, and when he <pb id=pb384a n=384>came home with her a certain man whom the emperor Otto the Young [Otho II] had given as hostage <hi>or</hi> put as steward there, wished to take her from him, but he would not let her go. The hostage <hi>or</hi> steward was a great champion, and he challenged Thang-brand to wager of battle, but Thang-brand got the victory and slew him; wherefore Thang-brand could not abide in Denmark, so he went to king An-laf Tryggvason, and he received him well, and he was consecrated priest there, and was the king&apos;s court-priest [chaplain] for a little while.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> King An-laf journeyed from Ireland eastward into Holm-garth [Russia], and out of Holm-garth to Norway, as it is written in the History of him, and he preached Christendom to the whole people. He had a church first built in a certain island called Moster, and set Thang-brand there to sing service in the island, and gave him house and lands. He was a great spendthrift and prodigal, and his money soon gave out. Then he gat him a ship of war, and harried the heathen, and plundered far and wide, and kept up his company thereby.

<p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> King An-laf came into Norway at the beginning of Goe [February]. There were many Icelanders with him. One of them was named Stephen. He was the son of Thor-gils son of Eilif, son of Helge Beolan of Keel-ness. King An-laf sent Stephen to Iceland the first summer he came to Norway to carry God&apos;s message there. But when he came to Iceland he was ill received, and worst by his kinsmen, for all the people here in this land were then heathen. Howbeit he journeyed boldly north and south, making known the right faith, but men paid little heed to his teaching. And when he saw that it got no furtherance, he betook <pb id=pb385a n=385>himself to defacing temples and high places and breaking the idols. Then the heathen gathered together a company, and hardly was he able to betake himself to Keel-ness, and there he lived with his kinsmen. His ship lay in at Gowe-water-oyce. She was carried out to sea in the winter by the river floods and strong gales. Whereon the heathen made this verse:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l>Now hath the mountain-wind wrecked Stephen&apos;s ship:
    <l>The mighty Anse hath caused it, I ween.
    <l>The Gods must be wroth ...
</lg>

                <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 80 (corrected here).]


<p>The ship was driven ashore somewhat broken, and Stephen had her repaired in the spring.

<p n=3.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> That summer it was made law at the All-moot that Christian men&apos;s kinsmen should take action against them as blasphemers, <hi>that is those kinsmen</hi> that were nearer than fifth cousins and farther than second cousins. And the same summer Stephen was sued for being a Christian. His kinsmen set the suit afoot because Christendom was then called a kin-shame <hi>or</hi> family disgrace. Thor-wolf and Ans-kell, Wand-rad and Tor-rad, the sons of Oswif the Sage, brought the suit against him, but Ospac would take no part in it. And Stephen said, &lsquo;There shall no harm come to me of my outlawry, but because of it great misfortune will overtake you within a few winters.&rsquo; Stephen went abroad in the summer, and king An-laf received him well.

<p n=3.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> When king An-laf heard of the breach of the peace that Thang-brand was committing, he summoned him to him, and told him that he <pb id=pb386a n=386>could not be in his service since he was a robber. Then Thang-brand asked the king to send him on some hard errand. And the king said, &lsquo;We will be reconciled if thou go to Iceland and make the land Christian.&rsquo; And Thang-brand said, &lsquo;I will venture upon it.&rsquo;


<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> The same summer Thang-brand journeyed to Iceland he made Seal-voes in North Alfet-frith, north of Fox-ess. But when it was known that Thang-brand and his men were Christians, the country folk would not speak to them nor show them to the haven <hi>or</hi> pilot them.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> At that time Hall o&apos; Side was living at A [River]. He was on a journey to Fleet-dale, but when he came home, Thang-brand went to meet him, and told him that king An-laf had sent him to Hall, if he made land in the East-friths: and he asked him to show them to a haven, and give them such other help as they needed. Hall had the vessel brought over to the southern Alfet-frith to Lear-voe, and they berthed up their ship at a place that is now called Thang-brand&apos;s-dock; but the crew Hall took home to his house-field, and they set up a tent there in which Thang-brand and his men dwelt. Thang-brand used to sing his mass there. The day before Michael&apos;s-mass Thang-brand made a holiday at the ninth hour. And Hall was in the tent at the time. He asked, &lsquo;Why dost thou stop work now?&rsquo; Says Thang-brand, &lsquo;To-morrow is the feast of Michael the Archangel.&rsquo; Hall asked, &lsquo;What manner of being is he?&rsquo; Thang-brand answers, &lsquo;He is appointed to receive the souls of Christian men;&rsquo; and he went on to talk a great deal about the glory of God&apos;s angels. Said Hall, &lsquo;Mighty man is he whom these angels <pb id=pb387a n=387>serve!&rsquo; Said Thang-brand, &lsquo;God gives thee this knowledge!&rsquo; In the evening Hall said to his household, &lsquo;Thang-brand and his men hold the day to-morrow holy to their God, and I will have you profit thereby, wherefore ye shall do no work to-morrow, and we will now go and see the rites of the Christian men.&rsquo; On the morrow Thang-brand kept the hours [sang the services] in his tent, and Hall and his household went to see their rites, and they listened to the sound of the bells, and smelt the savour of the incense, and beheld the vestments, fine linen and purple. Hall asked his household what they thought of the rites of the Christians, and they said that they liked it well. And on the Saturday before Easter, Hall and all his household were baptized there in the River. The river was called Thwatt-a [Dip-water] ever afterwards.

<p>[Double text.] Hall was baptized the Saturday before Easter in his brook <hi>or</hi> beck, and all his household. Priest Thang-brand gave the brook a name, and called it Thwatt-water, and the homestead has ever since been called after it.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> That summer Thang-brand rode with Hall to the All-moot, and when they reached Shaw-wharf behold the heathen hired a certain man who was called Charm-Hedin, to make the earth give under Thang-brand. And that very day as they were riding out of Kirkby from Swart As-beorn&apos;s son, the son of Thorstan-Ketil the Fool&apos;s son,&mdash;men that <pb id=pb388a n=388>were all baptized generations back <hi>or</hi> these forbears dwelt at Kirkby one after another, and were all Christians, because no heathen man might dwell there,&mdash;Thang-brand&apos;s steed fell into the earth, but he sprang off its back and stood safe upon the bank. On this journey of theirs Thang-brand baptized many men&mdash;Gizor the White and Hall o&apos; Hawk-dale, who was then three years old, and Sholto, Scegge&apos;s son. Thang-brand did God&apos;s errand at the Moot bravely, and many men out of the South-land-men&apos;s Quarter and the North-land-men&apos;s Quarter received the faith. He went away after the Moot, meaning to go by the eastern road to Ey-frith. He came north into Axe-frith during the summer, and baptized many men in the brook hard by Skin-stead that is called Brand&apos;s-beck ever since, and at Thang-brand&apos;s pool in Midge-water, but he was not able to get further on his journey than Shelving-fleet, because of the force of the Ey-frith-men; so he turned back into East-frith and taught the faith there. Thang-brand went west by the southern road.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Now when Thang-brand began to teach the faith in Iceland many men set themselves to make lampoons on him. Thor-wald Weile, who dwelt at Wick in Grim&apos;s-ness, did so. He made verses upon Thang-brand, and this verse he told to Wolf the poet:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>To Wolf the dauntless Ugge&apos;s son I will send a message
    <l>To bid him drive away the foul blasphemer of the gods.
</lg>

                <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 80 (corrected here).]

<pb id=pb389a n=389><p n=4.4.2>And Wolf answered him:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>I will not take the bait in my mouth though Thorwald send it.
    <l>It is not mine to bolt the fly, much evil will come of it.
</lg>

                <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 80 (corrected here).]

<p n=4.4.4>Winter-lide the poet also made a lampoon upon Thang-brand, and many others beside did so. But when Thang-brand and his friends were come west into Fleet&apos;s-lithe&mdash;now God-laf Arason of Reek-hills was with him&mdash;they found that Winter-lide the poet was out cutting turf with his house-carles. And Thang-brand and his men went after him and slew him. And this verse was made upon God-laf:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The Rood-bearer [Thangbrand] slew the Poet with a sword.
    <l>The Soma-keeper [Godlaf] smote Winter-lide the poet.
</lg>

<p n=4.4.6>Thence they journeyed westward into Grim&apos;s-ness, and came upon Thor-wald by Hengist-beck, and slew him there. Then they turned back and stayed with Hall a second winter, and in the spring Thang-brand made ready his ship.



<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> That summer Thang-brand was sued to outlawry for these manslaughters.

<p>He put to sea, but was driven back into Borg-frith up the Hot-river, at the place that is now called Thang-brand&apos;s-dock, down from Ship-deep, and there still stands on a rock his mooring-stone. But when they were come there, the men of the hundred held a meeting to forbid all dealing with them. Thang-brand came to Cross-holt and sung mass there, and set up a cross.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> There was a man named Col, that dwelt at Beck-bent. He had so much meat that he hardly knew what he should do with it. Thang-brand <pb id=pb390a n=390>went to his house and wanted to buy meat of him, but he would not sell any. Then they took some of the meat, and left the worth of it there. Col went down to Hot-river-ness and complained to Scegg-Beorn, who dwelt there. He went with Col to see Thang-brand, and they asked him to give back what he had robbed and pay boot for it, but Thang-brand denied this flatly. They fought on the water-meadow down by Stan&apos;s-holt, and Scegg-Beorn fell there and eight men with him. Scegg-Beorn&apos;s barrow stands there on the water-mead, but the others were buried at Land-drow&apos;s-holt hard by the water-meadow, and there is still to be clearly seen the cairns. Two of Thang-brand&apos;s men fell.

<p>But when Gizor the White knew of these tidings he asked Thang-brand to his house, and he stayed there with him the third winter.

<p n=5.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> That winter Thang-brand&apos;s ship was driven out of Hot-river and badly wrecked, and driven ashore north of Calf-beck.

<p n=5.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Stan-wor, the mother of poet Ref, came to meet him. She preached heathendom to Thang-brand and spoke at length to him. Thang-brand was silent while she spake, but afterwards he talked long, and confounded all that she had said. &lsquo;Hast thou heard this,&rsquo; said she, &lsquo;that Thor challenged Christ to a wager of battle, and he dared not to fight against Thor?&rsquo; &lsquo;I have heard,&rsquo; saith Thang-brand, &lsquo;that Thor was nothing more than dust and ashes if God had not wished him to live.&rsquo; &lsquo;Knowest thou,<corr>&rsquo;</corr> saith she, &lsquo;who hath wrecked thy ship?&rsquo; &lsquo;What sayest thou thereon?&rsquo; saith he. &lsquo;I will tell thee,&rsquo; saith she&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Thor drove Thangbrand&apos;s ship from her moorings,
    <pb id=pb391a n=391><l>The Powers broke the sea-bird of the bell-ward,
    <l>Christ did not guard the vessel,
    <l>God did not watch over the boat.
</lg>

            <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 80 (corrected here).]

<p n=5.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> In the spring Thang-brand journeyed west into Bard-strand to see Guest the Sage, and there a Norwegian bear-sark challenged him to wager of battle, and Thang-brand consented thereto. The bear-sark said, &lsquo;Thou wilt not dare to fight with me, if thou see my feats; I can go barefoot over a burning fire, and I can let myself fall naked on my knife-edge, and neither does me any harm.&rsquo; Thang-brand answered, &lsquo;Nevertheless God shall rule in this.&rsquo; Thang-brand hallowed the fire, and made the sign of the cross over the knife. The bear-sark burnt his feet when he walked through the fire, and when he fell upon his knife it went through him, and he got his death thereby. At which thing many good men rejoiced, albeit they were heathen. Then Guest and certain of his friends had themselves prime-signed.

<p n=5.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Thang-brand went eastward and had his ship repaired. He called her Iron-basket. He sailed south along the frith to Haven, and put into the bay, and lay there ready for sea, and that place was called Iron-basket&apos;s-head ever after. It lieth between Haven and Belly-holt. He went abroad that summer to meet king An-laf at Thrond-ham.


<pb id=pb392a n=392><p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> In the summer at the Moot there was great talk about the faith which Thang-brand preached, for some men blasphemed it much, but they that were baptized mocked the gods, and so there arose great parties <hi>or</hi> factions. It was then that Sholto, Scegge&apos;s son, recited this lampoon at the Rock of Laws. [See Libellus <hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 3.]

<p n=6.1.1>And for this lampoon Run-wolf the priest <hi>or</hi> gode, the son of Wolf, the son of Eor-wend the gode, took action and sued Sholto for blasphemy, and showed therein more of his might and obstinacy than right. Albeit he could not get the court sat&mdash;so beloved was Sholto&mdash;before he set it at Axe-water-bridge, and had both bridge-tails kept with arms. There was no one who would sum up the case till Thor-beorn, the son of Thor-kell o&apos; God-dales, took his seat in the court and summed up the case, and by his doom was Sholto condemned to outlawry for his blasphemy.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> That summer he went abroad in the ship that he had built at home in Thiors-water-dale, and he brought her down along West Rang-water to the sea. And as he and his men were journeying down below along the river, a man came running along the land above with a spear and shield in his hands. Sholto called to him,

<lg>
    <l>&lsquo;There lies a wisp of straw where thine heart should be.&rsquo;
</lg>

<p>He cast the spear at Sholto, but Sholto caught up his shield and the spear lit upon it. Sholto&apos;s men sprang ashore and took the man, and asked <hi>him</hi> who he was. He said his name was Narve, and <pb id=pb393a n=393>that Run-wolf had sent him to get the head of Sholto, and thereby he should free himself from his outlawry. But Sholto said, &lsquo;I know a better thing for thee; do thou come aboard with me, and I will make thee a free man.&rsquo; Sholto went aboard and made land about harvest north in Throndham, for he wished to meet king An-laf. And at the same time Gizor the White, his father-in-law, came abroad from Iceland.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> King An-laf had christened Haloga-land, and he reached Niths oyce about harvest-tide. Now there were there at that time many Icelanders captains of ships. Ceartan son of Olaf Peacock, and Calf As-gar&apos;s son, and Bolle Thor-lac&apos;s son commanded one ship. Hall-dor the son of God-mund the Mighty was also there in command of his own ship, and Col-ban son of Thord the priest <hi>or</hi> gode of Frey, and Swert-ing the son of Run-wolf the priest <hi>or</hi> gode, Hall-fred Ot-here&apos;s son, and Thor-arin Neb-wolf&apos;s son. All these were heathen men. They lay off the town, meaning to sail to the south of the country, but they did not get a wind till the king was come from the north.

<p n=6.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> It happened one fine day that there came men from the town to swim in the sea, and they that were on board the ships perceived that one of the men was a far better swimmer than the rest. Said Bolle Thor-lac&apos;s son to Ceartan his kinsman, &lsquo;Why dost thou not try a swim with that clever man?&rsquo; Said Ceartan, &lsquo;I do not want to vie with him.&rsquo; &lsquo;Where is thy courage gone?&rsquo; says Bolle, and began to cast off his clothes. Then Ceartan sprang up and cast off his clothes, and bade Bolle be still. Ceartan then leapt into the sea to swim, and struck out towards the man and pulled him down, and held him under for <pb id=pb394a n=394>a time. After that they came up, and Ceartan pulled him down a second time; but when Ceartan wanted to come up, he caught hold of him and kept him down for a while. And the third time he pulled Ceartan down, and kept him down so long that he was well-nigh drowned. Then they swam ashore, and the man asked Ceartan if he knew with whom he had vied in swimming. He said he did not know. Then he gave Ceartan a scarlet cloak, and told him that now he must know with whom he had vied in swimming, and Ceartan knew then that this man was king An-laf. He thanked him courteously for his gift. The heathens were not at all pleased that Ceartan had taken a gift from the king.

<p n=6.4.1>On Michaelmas-day men (Icelanders) went to hear the services and see the ways of the Christians, and when they came aboard again they talked over among themselves what they thought of their rites. Ceartan spoke well of them, but only few of the others. The king soon heard of this, and sent for Ceartan and asked him if he would become a Christian. Ceartan said that it was in the king&apos;s power to bring him to consent. Then the king asked him what he meant by that. &lsquo;That thou should not give me less honour here than I may look for in Iceland if I do not go back there.&rsquo; And the king agreed to this. Then Ceartan was baptized, and he stayed with the king as his guest while he was in his chrisom-clothes.

<p n=6.4.2>[B&ast; (O). Double text.] Now first it must be told of the Icelanders that the same summer there came men out of Iceland to Nith&apos;s <pb id=pb395a n=395>oyce, a little before king An-laf came from the north out of Haloga-land. There was one man named Hall-dor son of God-mund the Mighty of Madder-field, another Col-ban the son of Thord Frey&apos;s priest <hi>or</hi> gode, the brother of Flose o&apos; the Burning, a third Swerting, the son of Run-wolf the priest <hi>or</hi> gode; and the master of the ship was Thor-arin Neb-wolf&apos;s son. These were all heathens, and many others both rich and poor. Those men that were named above, each with his crew, sought to sail away as soon as king An-laf was come from the north out of Haloga-land, because it was told them that the king compelled all men to Christendom. The heathens stood out of the river as soon as the king came to the town. They were sailing out along the frith, when there met them a contrary wind, and drove them back again up the frith to Nith-holm. It was told king An-laf that there were Icelanders lying out under Holm in certain ships, and they were all heathen, and wished to fly from his presence. The king straightway sent men out to them and <corr sic=forbad>forbade</corr> them to leave the country, and bade them put back to the town. They did so, but did not unload their ships. At that time there came out of Iceland men of note and great worth <hi>or</hi> worship that had taken Christendom at the hands of Thang-brand the priest, Gizor the White, and Sholto, Scegge&apos;s son, of Steer&apos;s-water-dale.



<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> At that very time Thang-brand the priest came to the king from Iceland, and told him what enmity men had shown him there, and said that there was no hope of Christendom being received there. Then the king was so angry that he had many of the Icelanders taken prisoners <pb id=pb396a n=396>and set in irons. Some he ordered to be slain, and some maimed, and some were plundered, for he said that he would pay them for the unworthy way their fathers had received his message in Iceland. But Sholto and Gizor spoke for them, saying that the king had promised that no man should have done such ill but that he would give them his peace if they would be baptized. Gizor reckoned up his kinship to the king: Alof, his mother, was the daughter of Bead-were the Herse <hi>or</hi> Lord, son of Wicking-Care, and Ast-rid, king An-laf&apos;s mother, was the daughter of Eirik Bead-were&apos;s brother. Moreover Gizor said that he thought there was hope that Christendom would succeed in Iceland if it were wisely forwarded. &lsquo;But Thang-brand hath carried himself there as he did here, rather lawlessly in slaying certain men there, and men thought it hard to brook such behaviour in a stranger.&rsquo; And king An-laf said, &lsquo;All these men shall have quarter if Sholto and thyself will bind yourselves that Christendom shall succeed in Iceland; but I will take as hostages those among them whom I think to be of the best families of the Icelandmen, until it be tried how the business goes.&rsquo; And to this end the king named Ceartan Olaf&apos;s son, Hall-dor, the son of God-mund the Mighty, Col-ban, the son of Thord the priest <hi>or</hi> gode of Frey, the brother of Flose o&apos; the Burning, and Swerting, the son of Run-wolf the priest <hi>or</hi> gode. Then a man said when Swerting was spoken of, &lsquo;Swerting is not worthy of Sholto being bound for him, for his father sued Sholto sackless <hi>or</hi> for no guilt.&rsquo; But Thang-brand answered and said, &lsquo;It will often be proven that Sholto takes a better part than those who are against <pb id=pb397a n=397>him; and do thou, lord, treat Sholto and Gizor well, for they often repay evil with good.&rsquo; Sholto and Gizor agreed to do the king&apos;s errand to Iceland, and then all the Icelanders that were there were set free and baptized.

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> King An-laf stood god-father to Hall-fred, for he would not let himself be baptized unless he did; and therefore the king called him the Hard-poet, and gave him a sword to bind the name.

<p>Gizor and Sholto stayed that winter with the king, and Gizor sat as the king&apos;s drink-mate nearer the king above his thanes. And the Icelanders that were hostages were with the king also, and were well entreated.



<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> In the spring Sholto and Gizor fitted out their ship to go to Iceland. Many would have dissuaded Sholto from going, but he paid no heed to what they said.

<p>That summer king An-laf went out of the country to Wend-land in the south, and he sent Leif Eiric&apos;s son to Green-land to preach the faith there. It was then that Leif discovered Wine-land the Good. He also discovered a crew on the wreck of a ship out in the deep sea, and so he got the name of Leif the Lucky.

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Sholto and Gizor made land off Door-holm-oyce the day that Flose o&apos; the Burning was riding over Arn-stack-heath to the All-moot. And he heard from them that had rowed off to them that Col-ban his brother had been taken and kept as a hostage, and all about the errand Sholto and Gizor were doing, and he told these tidings at the All-moot. <pb id=pb398a n=398>Sholto and Gizor made the West-man-eys the same day, and berthed their ship off Harrow-eyre. There they carried their butts ashore and the church timber that king An-laf had had hewn; he had told them withal that they should raise a church where they first shot their landing-stages ashore. Before the church was raised they cast lots to find on which side of the bay it should stand, and the lot fell for the north side, where there were sacrifices and harrows before. But when Gizor and his men had abode in the island two days, and had already set up the frame-timbers, then they went thence and made Ey-sand. It was the very day when men were riding to the Moot. They could get no furtherance or horses east of Wrang-water, because the moot-men of Run-wolf held every house. They walked till they came to Have to Scegge Ansgaut&apos;s son [Iodur&apos;s son]. He gave them horses for the Moot; but Thor-wald his son had already ridden from home. He had to wife Col-torf, Sholto&apos;s sister. And when they came to Bath-dale they persuaded Sholto that he should stay behind with eleven other men, because he was under the lesser outlawry.

<p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Gizor and his men rode on until they came to Welling-kettle by Aulfus-mere. Then they sent word to the All-moot that their friends and kinsfolk by marriage should ride to meet them. They had heard then that their foes meant to keep them off the moot-field. But before they rode from Welling-kettle Sholto and his men came up. And their kinsmen and friends came to meet them, and then they rode <pb id=pb399a n=399>to the Moot with a great company to the booth of As-grim Ellida-Grim&apos;s son, the sister&apos;s son of Gizor. Then the heathen men ran together under all arms, and it was mighty nigh coming to a battle between them, but that there were some that wished to hinder the peace being broken, albeit they were not Christians. There was a priest whose name was Thor-mod, whom king An-laf had given to Sholto and Gizor. He sung mass the day after at Geow-bank, up over the West-frith-men&apos;s booth. Thence they walked to the Rock of Laws. There were seven men in vestments. They had two crosses [carried before them] that are now in East Scard [Outer Scard]; one marks the height of king An-laf, and the other the height of Sholto Scegge&apos;s son.

<p n=8.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> At the Rock of Laws the whole assembly of the Moot was. Sholto and his company had incense burning, and the savour was smelt as well against the wind as before it. Then Sholto and Gizor set forth their errand well and bravely, and men wondered how quick and how well they spoke, and such great awe followed their words that their enemies dared not speak in answer to them. And then began this, that one man after another named him witnesses, and each man declared the other outlaw, the Christian men and the heathen men [against one another].

<p n=8.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Then came a man running and saying that <hi>earth-fire</hi> was come up in Aulfus, and that it would overrun the homestead of Thor-ord the gode. Then the heathen men began to say, &lsquo;It is no wonder that the gods are wroth at such speeches.&rsquo; Then Snorre the gode spoke: <pb id=pb400a n=400>&lsquo;What were the gods wroth over them, when the lava on which we are now standing was burning here?&rsquo;

<p>After that men left the Rock of the Laws.

<p n=8.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Then the Christian men prayed Hall o&apos; Side to speak the law for them which should follow Christendom. Hall fee&apos;d Thor-gar the gode, who was then Law-speaker, with half a hundred of silver [60] to speak the Law for both the Christian and the heathen, and at this time he [Thor-gar] was not yet baptized, [on this condition that he should keep three clauses in the framing of the laws according to what Sholto, Gizor, and Hall laid down, no matter how he framed the other laws. The first clause was that all men in Iceland should be Christian, and they take baptism that were unbaptized before. The second was that all temples and false gods should be unholy, i. e. unlawful. The third was that the lesser outlawry should be the penalty of all witchcraft <hi>or</hi> sacrifice if there were any witness thereof.]

<p>And when men came to the booths Thor-gar laid him down and spread a rug over his head, and lay all the day and all the night and the next day till the same hour.

<p n=8.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> The heathen men had then summoned a great gathering, and there they agreed to sacrifice two men out of each Quarter, and call upon the heathen gods withal that they would not let Christendom spread over the country.

<p>But Sholto and Gizor had another gathering of Christian men, and agreed that they too would have human sacrifices as many as the <pb id=pb401a n=401>heathen. They spake thus: &lsquo;The heathen sacrifice the worst men, and cast them over rocks or cliffs, but we will choose the best of men, and call it a gift of victory to our Lord Jesus Christ, and we will bind ourselves to live better and more sinlessly than before, and Gizor and I will offer ourselves as the gift of victory for our Quarter.&rsquo; And for the East-frith-men&apos;s Quarter there came forth Hall o&apos; Side and Thor-laf o&apos; Cross-wick, north of Reyd-frith, a step-son of Asbeorn Shag-head, <hi>and</hi> brother of Thor-arin of Seyd-frith. Ingi-laf was the mother of both. Fat-Cetil had summoned Thor-laf at the counsel of Brord-Helge, and the weather grew so bad that Cetil was glad to come to Thor-laf for the night, and there he got a good welcome, and thereby the suit fell. But out of the North-land-men&apos;s Quarter there came forth as the gift of victory, Hlenne the Old and Thor-ward the son of Spac-Beadwere. And out of the West-frith-men&apos;s Quarter Guest Ordlaf&apos;s son. There was no other with him, and Sholto and Gizor were ill pleased with this. Then up spoke Orm Codran&apos;s son. He was a guest at Gils-bank at that time, for Her-mund Illuge&apos;s son had to wife Gund-hild, his daughter. &lsquo;There would be a man for this place if my brother Thor-wald the Far-farer were here in the country, but I am willing now to stand if ye will receive me.&rsquo; They consented thereto, and he was baptized at once.

<p n=8.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> And on the next day Thor-gar sat up and sent word round the booths that men should go to the Rock of the Laws. And when men came to the Rock of the Laws he said that he thought it was come to a sorry pass in the land if men did not keep one law here in <pb id=pb402a n=402>the land, and begged that men would not do so, saying that therefrom would come battles and war, and that it would sweep away everything to the point of laying waste of the land. He also told them this [story], that there were two kings, the one named Day, who was in Denmark, the other named Tryggwe, who was in Norway. They had long kept up strife between them, till at last the people of both countries took the matter into their own hands and made peace between them, although they themselves did not wish it; but this plan was so successful that they [the kings], after a few winters&apos; space, were sending gifts to each other, and their friendship endured as long as they both did live. &lsquo;And this seems to me the best, not to let them have their will that are most out and out on each side, but let us so umpire the matter between them that each side may gain somewhat of his case, but let us all have one law and one faith. For this saying shall be proved true, <hi rend=sc>If the Constitution be broken the peace will be broken</hi>.&rsquo;

<p>Thor-gar ended his speech in such a way that each side agreed to hold those laws which he should think best to declare.

<p n=8.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> This was the declaration of Thor-gar, that all men in Iceland should be baptized and believe in one God, but as to the exposure of children, and the eating of horse-flesh, the old law should hold; men might sacrifice in secret if they would, but should fall under the lesser outlawry if witnesses came forward against them. This heathendom was taken away some years later.

<p>B&ast; (N). Then he put forth the rules as to the keeping of the Lord&apos;s-day and the fast-days, the days of Yule, and the days of Pasch <hi>or</hi> Easter, and the greatest holidays.

<pb id=pb403a n=403><p n=8.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> All the North-land-men&apos;s Quarter were baptized in Reek-bath in Bath-dale as they rode from the Moot, for they would not go into cold water. Sholto spake <hi>this verse</hi> when Run-wolf was baptized,

<lg>
    <l>&lsquo;We are teaching the old priest now how to mumble the salt.&rsquo;
</lg>

<p>That summer the whole assembly of the Moot was baptized as men were riding home. Most of the Western-men were baptized in Reek-bath in South Reek-dale. Snorre gode had the greatest weight among the West-frith-men.

<p n=8.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> The summer when Christendom was taken into the laws of Iceland there were gone from the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ one thousand winters.

<p n=9.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> That summer king An-laf vanished off the Long Serpent south off Swold, iiii id. Septembris. He had then been king of Norway five winters. After him Earl Eiric Hacon&apos;s son took the rule.



<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Thor-wald Codran&apos;s son and Stephen Thor-gil&apos;s son met after the vanishing of king An-laf. They travelled both together far and wide over the world, and all the way out to Jerusalem, and thence to Mickle-garth [Byzantium], and so to Coenu-garth [Kovno <hi>or</hi> in Lettic Kaune] the Eastern along the Dnieper. Thor-wald died in Russia a short way from Palteskia [Polotsk]. There he is buried in a certain rock <hi>or</hi> hill at the church of John the Baptist, and they call him a saint. So saith Brand the Far-farer:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>I have been where to Thorwald
    <l>Codran&apos;s son Christ giveth rest:
     <pb id=pb404a n=404><l>He is buried in a high mount
    <l>Up on the Dnieper at John&apos;s Church.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 363.]

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Stephen then went north to Denmark, and when he came to Denmark he quoth this verse:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>I will not name him, but I will mark him nearly&mdash;
    <l>Down-bent is the niddering&apos;s nose:
    <l>He who got king Swain abroad by treason,
    <l>And drew Tryggvason into his toils.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 368.]

<p>In this verse earl Sig-wald thought he could see his own marks, and for this reason he let slay Stephen.

<p>This is the relation of Are the Old [Elder]:&mdash;



<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gizor the White</hi> dwelt at Head ere he built the homestead at Scal-holt and flitted his household over there. He set all his mind to the strengthening of Christendom. He sent his son Is-laf south into Sax-land, and he went to school in a town then called Her-forth [Her-fort], and when he came to Iceland he took to wife Dalla Thor-wald&apos;s daughter, and their sons were Gizor, and Tait All-crafts in Hawk-dale, and Thor-wald.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Here were first foreign bishops, who taught teachings. [Lib. <hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.]

<p>See Libellus <hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1. 8 ........ There over his grave stood Are the historian, being twelve winters old, he who has told most of the things that are here written.

<pb id=pb405a n=405><p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> See Libellus <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1, 2 .... He has been the wisest of the law-speakers of Iceland next to Skafte.... [Mark.]

<p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4&ndash;7.</ab> See Libellus <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 3&ndash;9, 11.

<p n=10.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Bishop Gizor kept such peace in the land that there were no great feuds between the chiefs, and the carrying of arms was almost laid aside. Most of the men of worship were clerks and hallowed priests, albeit <pb id=pb406a n=406>they were chiefs. Such were (in the <hi rend=sc>South</hi>), Hall Tait&apos;s son in Hawk-dale, and Sæ-mund the historian, Magnus Thord&apos;s son in Reek-holt, Simon Ior-und&apos;s son in By; and in the <hi rend=sc>West</hi> God-mund the son of Brand in Herd-holt, Are the historian, Ingi-mund Einar&apos;s son o&apos; Holar; in the <hi rend=sc>North</hi>, Cetil Thor-stan&apos;s son o&apos; Madderfield, and Cetil God-mund&apos;s son; and in the <hi rend=sc>East</hi>, priest John Thor-ward&apos;s son, and many others, though they be not written here.

<p n=10.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> See Libellus <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 10&ndash;12 .....

<p>Iceland had then been settled two hundred winters twelve told [240], one hundred in heathendom, one hundred in Christendom.

<p>There had then passed from the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ eleven hundred and eighteen years.

<p n=10.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> When bishop Gizor died, these were the greatest chiefs in Iceland: in the <hi rend=sc>North</hi>, Haf-lide Mar&apos;s son, and the sons of As-beorn Arnor&apos;s son in Shaw-frith, Thor-gar Hall&apos;s son, and priest Cetil Thor-stan&apos;s son; and in the <hi rend=sc>East</hi>, Gizor Einar&apos;s son, Sig-mund Thor-gil&apos;s son: he died that year on pilgrimage to Rome; and in the <hi rend=sc>South</hi>, Hall Tait&apos;s son, Scule Egil&apos;s son; and in the <hi rend=sc>West</hi>, Styrme Rein&apos;s son, Hall-dor Egil&apos;s son, Thor-gils Orde&apos;s son, Thord Egil&apos;s son, Thord Thor-wald&apos;s son in Water-frith.


<!-- END OF TRANSLATED TEXT -->

</div2>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<pb id=pb407 n=407>
<div1 id=s3.1.1>
<head type=label>APPENDIX TO § 1 (<hi rend=sc>BK.</hi> III).</head>

<head>THE TALE OF THORWALD THE FAR-FARER.</head>


<p>This story is part and parcel of the Gunlaug section of Christne Saga; both taken together make up the complete story such as it has been handed down. In the Christne Saga text we used up the smaller and handier bits: the lengthy ones that could not find place there we give here. It has gone through the crucible of being <corr sic=endited>edited</corr> in Latin and amplified, by Gunlaug one thinks, for he is quoted. The Latin is lost, but a Norse version, late 13th or early 14th century, has been inserted in the big Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Saga, as found in Flatey-book, AM. 61, and Berg-book. Hence it reads better in translation than in original Icelandic.

<p>The text has been over and over again issued, in the Scalh. 1689; Copen. 1778; Fornm. Sogor, vol. i. 1825, from AM. 61; in Flatey-book, vol. i. 1860; and in Biskopa Sogor, vol. i. p. 33 ff. As we have no fresh emendations to make, and would save space, we give <hi>no</hi> text, but refer the curious reader to one of the editions named above.



<p>1. There was a man named Eilif Erne, after whom the highest mountain in Reek-strand in Shaw-frith is named [Pedigrees as Ld. III. <hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 6]. The third son of Eilif was named Codran. He dwelt at Gill-water in Water-dale. He was a wealthy man. His wife was named Iarn-gerd. One of their sons was called Orm, and the other Thor-wald. Codran loved his son Orm much, but he loved Thor-wald little or not at all. He was kept to work as soon as he could do anything; he was poorly clad, and treated in everything as if he were but a bastard compared with his brother. He served his father in the house according as he was bidden with all good-will.

<p>At that time Thor-dis the Wise-woman dwelt out at Shaw-strand, at the place that was afterwards called the Spae-quean&apos;s-fell. One summer she was the guest of Codran at Gill-water, for he was a friend of hers. But as Thor-dis was at the feast, and saw what difference there was made between the brothers, she said to Codran, &lsquo;I will give thee this advice, to show more kindliness henceforward to Thor-wald thy son than thou hast hitherto done; for I can see by true signs that he will become a more noble man than all the rest of thy kinsfolk; and if thou hast now but little love for him, then do thou give him money to trade with and let him go, if there be any one who will look after him while he is young.&rsquo; Codran saw that she spake thus out of good-will, and said that he would certainly give him some money, so he pulled out a bag and showed it to her. Thor-dis looked at the silver and said, &lsquo;He shall not have this money, for this money thou hast gotten by might <pb id=pb408 n=408>and oppression of men in fines.&rsquo; He brought out another bag and bade her look at it. She did so, and then said, &lsquo;I will not take this money on his behalf.&rsquo; Codran asked, &lsquo;What fault dost thou find with this money?&rsquo; Thor-dis answered, &lsquo;These pence thou hast drawn together out of thy greed to thy tenants, and out of profit on stock [usury] greater than is right, wherefore such moneys are not meet for the use of him who shall be both upright and bountiful.&rsquo; Then Codran showed a fat money bag, and it was full of silver. Thor-dis took out of it three marks of silver on Thor-wald&apos;s behalf, and gave Codran back what was over. Then Codran said, &lsquo;Why art thou rather willing to take of these pence on my son&apos;s behalf than of those which I showed thee before?&rsquo; She answered, &lsquo;Because thou hast come by them fairly, for thou hast taken them in the heritage of thy father.&rsquo; After this Thor-dis went away from the feast with seemly gifts and the friendship of Codran. She took Thor-wald home with her to Spae-quean&apos;s-fell, and he was with her for a little while, well kept as to clothes and other things that he needed, and he began to thrive mightily.

<p>2. But when he was fairly full grown he went abroad by the counsel of Thor-dis. He did not stop till he came to Denmark. There he met Swain, who was called Fork-beard. Swain was of mean race by his mother&apos;s side, but he said that he was the son of Harold the son of Gorm the king of the Danes. Swain was not in the country in Denmark at that time, because king Harold could not acknowledge his fatherhood to him. He was out long a-warring, and was called <hi>King</hi> by the liths-men [crews], as was the custom of wickings. But when Thor-wald came to see Swain he received him well, and Thor-wald became his man, and was with him some summers a-warring West of the Sea [i.e. in the British Isles], Thor-wald had not been long with king Swain ere that the king began to prize him above other men, and above all his own friends, because Thor-wald was a man of good counsel, whom all could see to be a man of worth and wisdom, strong of body and stout-hearted, keen in fight and brisk in battle, bountiful and open-hearted with his money, and proved of the fullest faithfulness and humble service, heartily liked and dearly loved by all the <hi>liths-men</hi>, and not undeservedly, for though he was still a heathen he showed justice above the custom of other heathen men, so that all the booty he took in warring he bestowed upon the needy and in ransoming prisoners, and he helped many who were hard put to it. Now inasmuch as he was more valorous than the other liths-men, it was made a law that he should have some choice thing out of every capture. But he made use of this privilege they gave him by choosing out the son of some mighty man, or such other object as they who lost it would miss most, and as his fellows thought least about giving up to him, and these he would send back to them that had lost them. Wherefore they also loved him as much that had been plundered by Swain&apos;s men, and they spread abroad the praise of his goodness. And thus he was able easily to free his own men, even though they were taken prisoners by his enemies, and no less a person than king Swain himself.

<p>3. It so happened that once upon a time as Swain was harrying in Bretland [Wales], and at the first he won the victory and took much plunder, but as he was foraging far away into the land away from his ships, there met him so great a troop of horsemen that he could not withstand them. Then king Swain was taken, bound, and cast into prison, and with him Thor-wald Codran&apos;s son and many other noble and worshipful men. The next day there came a rich duke to the <pb id=pb409 n=409>dungeon [lit.: dark-room] with a great company to take Thor-wald out of the dungeon [lit.: dark-room], because a little time before he had set free the son of that same duke when he was taken prisoner, and sent him home free to his father. The duke bade Thor-wald walk out and go away free, but Thor-wald swore that he would by no means go forth alive save king Swain were set loose and free with all his men. The duke did this at once for his sake, as king Swain witnessed afterwards as he sat at a noble feast with two other kings. And when the courses came in, a certain steward spake, saying that there could never again be a table so worthily set as this was where three such mighty kings were eating out of one dish. Then king Swain answered, smiling, &lsquo;I can find a stranger, a yeoman&apos;s son, who alone hath in himself, if a right valuation were taken thereof, in no way less nobility and honour than all we three kings together.&rsquo; Now at these words there was great merriment in the hall, and they all asked laughingly, &lsquo;Where and who can this man be that he speaks so much praise of?&rsquo; He answered, &lsquo;This man of whom I am speaking here, is as wise as befits a great king, as strong and bold as the sturdiest bear-sark, and as courteous and well-mannered as the most gentle sage.&rsquo; Then he told that story of Thor-wald that was just now written, how he freed the king by his friendship and by reason of the many noble and praiseworthy deeds that he had done.

<p>[<hi>Here follows an enlarged paraphrase of the story of the stone worshipped by Codran, of which only the following passages that contain fresh traits of interest are worth giving in this place.</hi>]

<p>4. <hi>Codran sees bishop Frederic doing his service.</hi> And on the same day he came to his son Thor-wald and spake: &lsquo;Now I have seen and laid it somewhat to mind, what earnest service ye do your God; moreover, as far as I can perceive, our faiths are far apart, for it is clear to me that your God is to be pleased with the light which our gods dread. And if it be so as I think, then this man whom thou callest the bishop of you, is your diviner <hi>or</hi> soothsayer, for I can see that thou gettest from him all the things which thou art preaching to us on thy God&apos;s behalf. But I have another diviner who does me much good. He tells me beforehand many things before they happen. He takes care of my cattle, and reminds me of what I have to do, and what I am to beware of, wherefore I have a great refuge in him, and I have worshipped him all my life long; but he dislikes thee very much, and also thy diviner [the bishop], and your way of faith, and he dissuades me from paying any respect to you, and most of all against taking your faith.&rsquo; Thor-wald spake: &lsquo;Where doth thy diviner dwell?&rsquo; Codran answers, &lsquo;Here he lives a short way from my house in a great and comely stone.&rsquo; Thor-wald asked how long he had lived there. Codran said that he had lived there a long time.



<p>[<hi>Thor-wald says he is a devil.</hi>]

<p>Codran answers, &lsquo;It is easy for me to see that your bishop&apos;s views and his are very far apart, and I perceive no less that each of you pleadeth his case with vigour; and all the things that ye say of him, the very same things he bringeth forward about you; but what needs it to speak more thereon? This covenant that thou hast proposed will prove the truth.&rsquo; Thor-wald was glad of his father&apos;s words, and told the bishop all that they had agreed upon, and their talk together. On the next day after this the bishop hallowed water, and then went with prayer and psalm-singing, and sprinkled the water all about the stone, and he poured it also over the stone so that it was all wet. The night after Codran&apos;s <pb id=pb410 n=410>diviner came to him in a vision, and with downcast countenance and trembling as for fear, he spake to Codran: &lsquo;Thou hast done ill in asking here men that brew treason against thee, so that they seek to drive me out of my house, for they poured boiling water over my lodging, so that my children suffer no small torment from the burning drops that drip in through the thatch, and though it doth not hurt me myself much, all the same it is grievous to listen to the wail of small children as they cry with their burns.&rsquo; [<hi>The sprinkling is again repeated.</hi>]

<p>On the next night following the false diviner appeared again to Codran in very different guise to that in which he was wont to appear to him with bright and blithe countenance and nobly arrayed, but now he was in black and paltry raw-hide jacket, dark and evil of countenance, and spake thus to the franklin with a sorrowful and quaking voice: &lsquo;These men are firmly bent on robbing us both of our goods and profits, since they wish to drive me away from mine own heritage, and bereave thee of my loving care and provident divination. Now, play the man, and drive them away, so that we may not lack all good things by reason of their wickedness, for I shall never fly; nevertheless it is grievous to endure for long all their evil deeds, and....&rsquo; [<hi>The sprinkling is repeated a third time.</hi>] But the wicked spirit showed himself to the franklin the night after with pitiful countenance, and brought up this lamentation after the following fashion, with broken voice, saying thus: &lsquo;This wicked traitor, the bishop of the Christians, has bereft me of all my lands; he has spoilt my lodging; poured boiling water over me, soaked my clothes, torn and made them useless withal, and he has committed arson, such as cannot be atoned for, upon me and my household; moreover he hath perforce driven me now far away into waste places and outlawry. And now we must needs sever both our neighbourliness and our friendship, and all this hath been brought about by thy lack of good faith alone. Bethink thee now, who will hereafter care for thy goods so carefully as I have done up till now? Thou callest thyself an upright and faithful man, but thou hast repaid me evil for good!&rsquo; Then answered Codran, &lsquo;I did worship thee as a profitable and strong god as long as I was not aware of the truth, but now that I have proved thee full of falsehood and very weak, therefore it is right and blameless for me to forsake thee, and flee to the shelter of that Godhead which is much better and stronger than thou.&rsquo; With that they parted with enmity, and no cheer at all. [<hi>Of course Codran is baptized.</hi>]

<p>Next spring the bishop and Thor-wald went west to Lithe-dale with their company, and set up housekeeping at Beck-moot, and dwelt there four winters, and went forth in these years far and wide over Iceland preaching God&apos;s word.

<p>5. On the first season that they were at Beck-moot Thor-wald asked that there should be given him to wife a woman named Wig-dis. She was daughter of An-laf, who dwelt at Hawk-gill in Water-dale. But when the bishop and Thor-wald came to the feast, there was a great gathering of heathen men there. There was a great hall, as was then much the custom, and there ran a little brook across the hall, well cared for. But neither side, Christian or heathen, would eat with each other, and therefore this counsel was taken, to hang a curtain across the hall in the midst where the brook ran. The bishop was to be by the door of the hall with the Christian men, and the heathens inside within the curtain. [<hi>The story of the two bear-sarks Hawk is put in here, how they and bishop Frederic test the truth of each faith by walking through fires. <pb id=pb411 n=411>The bear-sarks perish.</hi>] They were carried up the gill and buried there, wherefore the place was called Hawk&apos;s-gill....

<p>This occurrence [the feast probably] Gunlaug the monk says that he heard a truthful man, Glum Thor-gils&apos; son, tell, and Glum had got it from a man named Arn-or, who was the son of Arn-dis.

<p>An-laf of Hawk&apos;s-gill afterwards made a church at his homestead, and Thor-wald gave him the wood for it.



<p>[<hi>After the story of Clamp&apos;s fire and Hedin&apos;s hate.</hi>]

<p>Now though they endured much wrong from wicked men, they did not any the more refrain from going round the country setting forth God&apos;s errand. They removed to Lax-water-dale, and sojourned there for a time under Eilif&apos;s-fell with Atle the Strong, Thor-wald&apos;s father&apos;s brother. Atle was then baptized with all his servants, and many other men that they came to, because the grace of the Holy Ghost touched <hi>or</hi> came upon them by reason of their words.

<p>6. The report of the bishop flew, by God&apos;s gift, into the ears of a little boy five winters old, whose name was Ingi-mund, the son of Hafr o&apos; God-dales. He was in fosterage at Reek-strand. Ingi-mund fell into talk one day with his foster-father&apos;s shepherd, and asked him to take him secretly to Eilif&apos;s-fell to see the bishop. The shepherd consented. They went over Ceartan&apos;s-geow, and went over the fell to Lax-water-dale. And as soon as they came to Atle&apos;s house at Eilif&apos;s-fell the boy began to pray to be baptized. Atle took the boy by the hand, and led him to the bishop, saying, &lsquo;This boy is the son of a nobleman, albeit a heathen, and the boy begs to be baptized, though it is without the consent or counsel of his father or foster-father. Now look to it what is to be done, for it is surely to be looked for that it will displease both of them greatly if he be baptized.&rsquo; The bishop answered, laughing, &lsquo;Verily,&rsquo; said he, &lsquo;such a holy office cannot be denied to a young boy, and the rather in that he hath a more wholesome understanding in his mind than his grown-up kinsfolk.&rsquo; Then the bishop baptized Ingi-mund, and taught him before he went away what were the chief things it was needful for him to know as a Christian.

<p>7. It is said that bishop Frederic had baptized a certain man whose name was Mane [Moon], and because he held the holy faith with many virtues and good living he was called Mane the Christian. He dwelt at Holt in Colge-mire. He built a church there. In this church he served God both day and night with holy prayers and alms-giving, which he bestowed in many ways upon poor folk. He had a fishing-stead in the river there not very far from his house, which even now-a-days is still called by his name, Mane&apos;s-force, for once upon a time when there was great famine and hunger, he had nought to feed the hungry withal, so he went to the river and there he had salmon enough in the deep water under the force. This salmon-fishing he endowed the church of Holt with, and Gunlaug the monk says that this fishery has ever since belonged to that church. Hard by the church there is a mark to be seen of his having lived like an anchorite, for just as he was far away from most people of that day in his mind, so he wished, with regard to bodily presence, to be far from the common crowd, for over against the churchyard it is to be seen that there had been a certain walled garth, where it is told that he worked at haymaking in the summer to get fodder enough for the one cow whereby he lived, for he wished to earn his livelihood by the work of his own hands rather than live in common with heathen men whom he hated, and this place is since called <hi>Mane&apos;s-garth</hi>.

<pb id=pb412 n=412><p>Thor-wald lived many years afterwards, and inasmuch as he was a distinguished man, strong and stout of heart, and in all places a keeper of God&apos;s commandments with perfect love, he bethought him that if he were to go back to his foster-land that it was not certain whether he could endure in all places, as he ought to do for the love of God, the onslaught and insults of his countrymen. Wherefore he took this counsel not to visit Iceland again, and he set forth on his way out into the world as far as Jerusalem to see the Holy Places. He went over all the land of the Greeks and reached Mickle-garth. The Throne-king himself received him with much worship, and gave him many noble friendly gifts, for God&apos;s grace was so nigh unto him, and his report flew over all the nations wheresoever he came, that he was held worthy by all men, whether small or great, as a pillar and upholder of the true Faith, and so honoured as a glorious confessor of our Lord Jesus Christ by the Kayser of Mickle-garth himself and all his princes, and no less by all the bishops and abbots over all the land of Greece and Syria, but most of all was he honoured in the East-Way [Baltic lands], when he was sent there by the Kayser as a ruler or officer placed over all the kings in Russia and in all Garth-ric [N. Russia]. Thor-wald Codran&apos;s son raised there from the foundation a noble monastery by the head church [cathedral] that is hallowed to John the Baptist, and endowed it with certain lands. And it hath been called ever after by his name, Thor-wald&apos;s Cloister. In this minster he ended his life, and there also he is buried. This cloister stands under a high rock that is called Dropn<note n=1 id=n412.1><ab type=textRef>Dropn]</ab> thus AM. 54; dravfn, AM. 61; read &lsquo;rock on the banks of a river called Dropn (= metathesis for Dnopr, i.e. Dnieper).&rsquo; The Flatey-book and AM. 61 abridge and omit the clause.</note>.

<p>When bishop Frederic and Thor-wald came to Iceland there were passed from the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ nine hundred years and one year of the ninety [981], and a hundred, ten told, and six winters from the beginning of the Settlement of Iceland. Three winters later Thor-ward Spac-Beadwere&apos;s son set up a church in Áse.

<p>There was a man named Stephen. He was the son of Thor-gils, the son of Eilif, the son of Helge, the son of Cetil Flat-neb, the son of Beorn Buna. Stephen was born at Keel-ness, and grew up there while he was a child. Stephen went abroad while he was young, and received the faith in Denmark, and became a man of mark.

<p>Stephen went to meet Thor-wald Cod-ran&apos;s son and went with him far and wide over the world to see the Holy Places and the ways of mighty men. At last Stephen turned back to the North-lands, and met An-laf Tryggvason west of the Sea, and became his man, and went with An-laf Tryggvason from the west to Norway.




<pb id=pb413 n=413>
<div1 id=s3.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 2.</ab> EARLY CHURCH LEGENDS.</head>


<p>There are a few little tales in the style of the Islendinga Sogor, wholly akin to the story of Aswolf, as given in Landnama-book, Lib. I. <hi rend=bold>7</hi>, (which we might have taken thence and placed with them here, where in logical sequence they would belong,) that give the few traditions handed down to us of Christianity <hi>before</hi> the missions in Iceland. They are positively dated by reference to pedigrees and to the famine (975). They are of much use in giving an insight into the spirit of the new Christian life as it appeared against the heathen background.

<p>There must have been more of these tales, which would almost have risen to the rank of <hi>Legenda Sanctorum</hi> to those who after 1001 looked back upon their heroes as, in the truest sense, confessors and martyrs. Names such as Thor-laf (p. 401), Groa (Ld. II. <hi rend=bold>21.</hi> 2), Orlyg (I. <hi rend=bold>6</hi>), Eor-wind (I. <hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 3), Cetil the Fool (IV. <hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1), and others&mdash;even the names of places such as Cross-wick, Kirk-by, Patrick&apos;s-frith&mdash;speak to those memories.

<p>The tales of <hi>Swade</hi> and <hi>Thor-hall Knop</hi> are of this character. The third tale, that of <hi>Thidrande</hi>, is of a weird, half-pagan character, and, like the lost Brian&apos;s Saga, is concerned with the pagan forebodings and threatenings of the Advent of the New Faith. Nial&apos;s Saga, in one of its genealogies, speaks of &lsquo;Thidrande, whom the díses <hi>or</hi> spirit-women slew,&rsquo; confirming the age of the tradition upon which the story is founded.

<p>The MSS. upon which our text rests are those of Tryggvason&apos;s Life, in which these pieces are inserted as episodes, viz. AM. 61, Flatey-book, Berg-book, and the fragmentary AM. 53, 54, 62.

<p>To save space we have given no text, only translations. The stories have all been preserved through being inserted in the big Olaf Tryggvason&apos;s Saga, and are found published in Flatey-book, vol. i; Fornm. S. vol. ii. The story of Thidrande is besides given in the Icel. Reader, 1879. It is here we are able to make our only text emendation.

<p>There is an emendation in the tale of Thidrande, where all the MSS. read &lsquo;uitgerdar mikit,&rsquo; which makes no sense. We read &lsquo;úti gráð mikit,&rsquo; the difference lying between &lsquo;uitg&apos;ð&rsquo; and &lsquo;útig&apos;ð&rsquo; (p. 418, l. 12 from bottom). The consensus of the MSS. shows that they all follow one archetype.

<div2>
<head><hi rend=sc>Swade and the Poor.</hi></head>

<p>Some time after the journey out of bishop Frederic and Thor-wald Cod-ran&apos;s son, there came about such a great famine in Iceland that many men died of hunger. There dwelt then in Shaw-frith a certain man of rank, and a very cruel man, whose name was Swade, at the place afterwards called Swade-stead. It came to pass one morning that he <pb id=pb414 n=414>called together many poor men, and bade them make a great grave and deep, a short way from the highway; and the poor men were fain if they might by the wage of their toil somewhat slake their sore hunger; and in the evening, when they had finished the making of the grave, Swade led them all into a little house, then he fastened the house, and said to them that were within, &lsquo;Rejoice and be glad, for soon shall your misery be brought to an end. Ye shall abide here to-night, and in the morning ye shall be slain and buried here in this great grave that ye have yourselves made.&rsquo; But when they heard this cruel doom that they were to get death for their toil, they began to weep with sore sorrow all through the night. It happened that Thor-ward the Christian, Spac-Beadwere&apos;s son, was going that very night up through the district on his errands, and his path lay very early in the morning by this same house wherein the poor men lay; and when he heard their lamentable cry he asked what grieved them. And when he was made aware of the truth by them he spake to them: &lsquo;Let us make a bargain together: if ye will do as I saith, if ye will believe in the true God whom I believe in, and do according to what I say, then I will free you hence. Then ye shall come to my house in Ridge, and I will feed you all.&rsquo; They said they would gladly do so. Then Thor-ward took the bar from the door, and they went forth at once rejoicing with great haste to his house down at Ridge. But when Swade was aware of this he grew mighty wroth, started at once, armed himself and his men, and rode with all haste after the runaways, meaning to take and slay them; and in the second place he was minded to repay cruelly the dishonour he thought he had gotten from him that had loosed them; but his evil thoughts and wickedness fell upon his own head, for just as he was riding hard along by the grave he fell off horseback and was straightway dead as soon as he reached the ground. And in that same grave which he had prepared for innocent men was he himself, a guilty heathen, buried by his followers, and with him his hound and his horse, after the old way. But Thor-ward o&apos; Ridge let the priest that he had with him baptize the poor men that he had set free from death, and teach them the holy doctrines [creeds and paternoster], and he fed them all there at his house as long as the famine lasted.

<p>Most men say that Thor-ward, Spac-Beadwere&apos;s son, was baptized by bishop Frederic, but Gunlaug the monk tells this, that some men believe him to have been baptized in England, and that thence he had brought the wood for the church which he had made on his farm.

<p>At the same time, as was spoken of just before, it was made law at a moot of the men of the hundred, that because of the hunger and so great famine, men were allowed to cast off the aged and even deny them shelter, and also others who were lamed, or stricken with diseases, and that none should harbour them. The bitterest gale and gnashing frost was then beating upon them. The greatest chief then on the country side was Arnor Carline-neb, who dwelt at Mickle-by on Os-land&apos;s-lithe. But when Arnor came home from this meeting his mother Thor-id, the daughter of Ref o&apos; Bard, came up to him and rebuked him very grievously for having been consenting when such a cruel law was made. She pleaded before him with great clearness and many true words what unheard-of and unnatural inhumanity it was that a man should give over his father and mother or other kinsfolk to so cruel a death. &lsquo;Now know thou for a certain,&rsquo; says she, &lsquo;that though thou do not such things thyself, thou art not at all without part and lot in such wicked manslaughters, for thou art a chief and a leader of others, if thou givest leave to the men under thee to put their fathers and mothers and next <pb id=pb415 n=415>of kin out of doors in the storm. Yea, and just the same is it, though thou give them no leave, if thou do not withstand such misdeeds with all thy might.&rsquo; Arnor understood the good intent of his mother, and took her rebuke well, and became very thoughtful as to what he should do; wherefore he took this counsel to send his servants to the next homesteads to gather together all the aged and those that were driven out, &lsquo;and bring them to me, and let them be nurtured with all kindliness.&rsquo; The next day he called a gathering of franklins. And when Arnor came to the meeting he spoke thus to them: &lsquo;It is known to you that we had a great gathering a short time ago, but I have since thought over our common necessity, and compared it with the inhuman course which we all agreed upon when we gave leave to put to death the aged and all those who cannot maintain themselves by earning their livelihood; and now, being overcome by these reasons, I repent me greatly of this so wicked and unexampled cruelty; and now, by taking thought, I have formed this plan which we shall all have and hold, that is, that each man show humanity and mercy to his fellow men, so that every one help his kindred as far as ever his means go in the first place, especially his father and mother, and in the next place that those who can shall fend off hunger and peril of life from their other near kinsfolk. And to this end we will lay out all our means and our live stock to defend the life of men, and slay for the succour of our kinsmen our horses rather than let our kin perish of hunger, so that no franklin shall hereafter keep at his house more than two horses. Moreover with regard to the evil habit which has found furtherance, of men keeping many dogs, so that many men might live by the meat which is given to them, now men shall slay the dogs so that few or none be left alive, and use, for food to save the life of man, that which aforetime was wont to be given to the dogs. And it is the quickest way to say at once that by no means will we give any of you leave, who by any means may give them any help whatever, to cast off his father or mother; but he who hath not the wherewithal to maintain his father and mother and his next of kin, let him bring them to my house in Mickle-by and I will feed them, but he that may and will not give succour to his next of kin, him I shall cruelly pay to the utmost of my power.&rsquo; [&lsquo;Now then, my dear friends and fellows, rather than lieges, let us uphold in all ways humanity and mercy towards our nearest of kin, and give no hold to our enemies to reproach us that we have with too great folly dealt so unrighteously with our neighbours as we were about to do. Now if he be a true God who hath made the sun that it may light and warm the world, and if saintly and righteous men please him as we have heard say, then let him show us his mercy so that we may prove indeed that he is the maker of men, and that he is mighty to steer and rule all the universe, and thereby we may believe in him, and worship no god save him only, true and blessed in his power.&rsquo;

<p>And when Arnor had spoken this, Thorward, Spac-Beadwere&apos;s son, who stood by, spoke and said as follows: &lsquo;This is now clear, Arnor, that the same God that thou didst speak of in thy speech hath sent his Holy Spirit into thy breast to put forth such blessed humanity as thou hast now set forth to men in thy speech. And I think this, that if king An-laf had heard thee say such words, he would have given thanks to God and thee for such fair furtherance; and therefore I think that when he shall get news of such doings that he will be wondrous fain, and indeed it is great pity for us that we cannot see him or hear his words, neither of which I am afraid we shall do.&rsquo;]

<pb id=pb416 n=416><p>And when all they that were come together agreed that it was with a good will he had spoken, they broke up the moot.

<p>There was then the sharpest cold and frost as there had been for a long time, and the cruellest north winds; and ice all over the ground, and the hardest coat of ice spread over all the earth, so that no grass came through it. But on the next night after this meeting, by divine providence, the mutability of the sky took so sudden a turn, that the morning after all the cruelty of the frost was away, and there were come instead the warm south wind and the best thaw. And from that day there came mild weather and bright melting sunshine. And the earth began to show itself day after day, so that within a little while all cattle got grass enough for its maintenance, and all men that had hearkened to the merciful counsel Arnor had given them were merry and very joyful, and received such ample return of divine gifts that therefore all Arnor&apos;s liegemen, men and women, quickly and joyfully followed their chief in taking upon them the holy conversation of the right faith, which was preached to them a little later. For within a few winters&apos; delay Christianity became law over all Iceland.

<div2>
<head><hi rend=sc>Thorhall Knop.</hi></head>

<p>There was a man named Thor-hall Knop. He dwelt at Knop-stead in Fleet. He was of noble family. His forebears had dwelt there before him. Thor-hall was a man of good life, though he was a heathen, as were then most folk in those parts. He was sorely taken and oppressed by leprosy. Thor-hall used to sacrifice to false gods, after the manner of his kinsfolk. There was a mighty temple not far from his homestead, where all the Fleet-men held a sacrifice once every year.

<p>One night as Thor-hall slept in his bed he dreamed that he thought he was out of doors, and he saw a bright man riding to his house on a white horse, arrayed in royal raiment, and holding a gold-mounted spear in his hand. And when Thor-hall saw this man draw near the house, there fell upon him dread, and he tried to turn into the house, but the knight was quicker than he, and leapt off his horse and went in front of the door, saying, &lsquo;Thou shalt not be afraid, for there shall no harm come to thee from me or my coming here; rather thou shouldest receive by my coming hither healing and joy, if thou wilt hearken to my counsel. Dost thou grieve at thy sickness? But I need not ask thee this, for I know that thou art grieved thereby. Follow me now, for I shall show a sure cure.&rsquo; The new-comer led him to a certain place out of the house-yard that lay round the house, and spake to him: &lsquo;In this place thou shalt build a house in honour of the true God, according as I shall show thee. But this God ye shall hear of this very year at the All-moot, for of a truth thou shalt ride thither this summer. Now, if thou worship with pure heart the God that shall be preached to thee there, thou shalt be whole, and with a whole body thou shalt enjoy peace and bliss in this world, and in the world to come everlasting honour and blessedness.&rsquo; Then he plotted out the foundation walls in the house-yard before Thor-hall with the butt of his spear, and spake thus to him:&mdash;

<p>&lsquo;After this fashion shalt thou make the house, and take for it the wood that is now in thy temple that is here a short way from thy house, whither thou and the men of thy district are wont to seek and to hold there their sacrificial feasts every year. This temple thou shalt pull down straightway in the morning when thou shalt rise up, and the false gods whom thou hast adored till now, thou shalt never worship again. Now, if thou believe my words, and pay heed without any doubt to the <pb id=pb417 n=417>things that I have bidden thee, then thou shalt shortly begin to mend, and thou shalt grow stronger from day to day.&rsquo; And with that the vision disappeared from before him.

<p>But when Thor-hall awoke he believed the vision, and as soon as it was day he bade all his workmen go forthwith and break down the temple and bring all the wood home to his house. And though they murmured thereat, and said among themselves that he must be mad, nevertheless they dared not speak against his command, but carried out fully that which he had told them to do. Then Thor-hall began to build a house, according in all to that fashion and size which had been shown to him in his dream.

<p>[But though historians have not full knowledge as to who it was that appeared to Thor-hall, it is thought likely that God himself had manifested his will through the bodily shape of king An-laf Tryggvason, who shortly after preached to him and many others help and healing by his own messenger on God&apos;s great errand. And from this also men conclude so respecting this vision that a worshipful man appeared to Thor-hall with royal array, and a little later he heard the royal message with which the messengers of king An-laf himself preached openly to all the people, the orthodox and true faith.]

<p>At the same time there dwelt a little way off, at the next homestead, a woman whose name was Thor-hild. She was a strong woman and a great sorceress. On the same night as the aforesaid vision appeared before Thor-hall, Thor-hild woke her men up early in the morning, as soon as it was light, and said as followeth: &lsquo;Ye shall go as quickly as may be and drive together and home out of the pastures all thy live stock, both neat and sheep and horses, and shut them up in the byres or folds, for none of them shall keep alive that is out of doors here to-day. For Thor-hall, my neighbour at Knop-stead, is gone mad and out of his wits, so that he hath sent his men to break down that worshipful temple that standeth there, and therefore the worshipful gods that have long been adored there must needs flee away in angry mood withal, and I think that they will seek shelter and an abode all the way north in Mast-ness. Now therefore I wish my stock not to be in their way, for they are so wroth and in such bitter mood that they will spare nought that shall stand before them.&rsquo; And now it was done as she had commanded, and all her live stock were driven home and shut up, save one pack-horse that had stayed behind in the hayes, and he was afterwards found dead.

<p>But with Thor-hall o&apos; Knop-stead all went according to the vision that had appeared to him. He began to mend of his ailment day by day, and his strength grew. He rode to moot in the summer, and met there the men that were setting forth Christian preaching, as shall shortly be told. Then Thor-hall took the true faith, and he was then first entirely whole of his body when he was baptized. After that he went home rejoicing, and worshipped Almighty God all the days of his life with [true] service in the church which he had hallowed and first built at Fleet, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, to Whom be honour and glory, one God in Trinity, world without end. Amen.

<div2>
<head><hi rend=sc>The Tale of Thidrande.</hi></head>

<p>1. There was a man of Norway whose name was Thor-hall. He came out to Iceland in the days of earl Harold Sigrodsson. He settled in Sour-beck-mouth and dwelt at Harrows-land. Thor-hall was a sage and much of a seer, and he was called Thor-hall the Spae-man <hi>or</hi> <pb id=pb418 n=418>Diviner. While he was dwelling at Harrows-land, Hall o&apos; Side was dwelling at Temple in Elfet&apos;s-frith, and there was the greatest friendship between them. Hall used to come as guest to Harrows-land every summer as he rode to the moot; and Thor-hall often went to stay there [with Hall] in the east for a long time. The name of Hall&apos;s eldest son was Thidrande. He was the most fair and promising of men, and Hall loved him best of all his sons. Thidrande went a voyaging between lands [i.e. he became a merchant trader] as soon as he was old enough. He was much beloved everywhere he went, for he was the most accomplished of men, and gentle and blithe to every child.

<p>2. It came to pass one summer that Hall, as he rode back from the moot, asked Thor-hall his friend to his house in the east. Thor-hall rode east [thither] somewhat later than Hall, and Hall received him with great kindness, as he was ever wont to do. Thor-hall abode there through the summer, and Hall said that he should not go home till the harvest feast was at an end. That summer Thidrande came out to Iceland into Bear-frith. He was then eighteen years old. He came home to his father&apos;s house, and men admired him greatly as they had often before, and praised his accomplishments; but Thor-hall the Diviner always held his peace when men were praising him most. And on a time Hall asked him why it was &lsquo;that thou dost not say aught about my son Thidrande, for I think that which thou sayest is to be remembered,&rsquo; says he. Thor-hall answered, &lsquo;It is not that aught in him or thee mislike me, nor that I see less than others that he is a most notable man; but rather it is for this reason: there are many praising him, and he has great deserts though he sets little by himself, but it may well be that ye will not be able long to rejoice in him, and then the regret for thy son will be great enough, such a noble fellow as he is, although every one do not praise his gifts to thy face.&rsquo; But as the summer wore on Thor-hall began to be very sorrowful. Hall asked him what it was. Thor-hall answered, &lsquo;I look for ill to come of this harvest feast that is to be here, for I have a foreboding that a diviner will be slain at this feast.&rsquo; &lsquo;I can clear up that,&rsquo; says the franklin; &lsquo;I have an ox ten years old whom I call Diviner, because he is wiser than any of the other neat, and he is to be slain at the harvest feast. Therefore let not this make thee sorrowful, for I mean that this feast, like the others, shall be an honour to thee and my other friends.&rsquo; Answers Thor-hall, &lsquo;I did not make mention of this because I was afraid for my own life, and I have a foreboding of greater and more wondrous tidings than I am minded now to proclaim.&rsquo; Said Hall, &lsquo;There is no reason why the feast should not be put off.&rsquo; Answers Thor-hall, &lsquo;It will not do to speak so, for what is fated must happen.&rsquo;

<p>3. The feast was made ready at the winter nights [8&ndash;10 Oct.]. Few of them that were bidden came, for the weather was sharp and very foul weather out of doors. And when men sat down to table in the evening, Thor-hall spake: &lsquo;I am about to ask men to pay heed to my counsel on this head, that no man here go out of doors to-night, for great evil will ensue thereby if this be not strictly kept. And whatever portents may happen, let men pay no heed thereto, for ill will come of it if any answer be made thereto.&rsquo; Hall commanded men to keep Thor-hall&apos;s commands, &lsquo;for they never fail, and it is better to bind up a whole limb [<hi>than an ailing one</hi>].&rsquo;

<p>Thidrande was serving the guests, for he was meek and lowly now as always. And as men were going to bed, Thidrande gave his own bed up to a guest, and cast himself down on a bench outside next the cross-wainscot. <pb id=pb419 n=419>And when almost all men were asleep, there was a call at the door, but no man made as if he heard it; and this happened thrice. Then Thidrande sprang up and said, &lsquo;It is a great shame that every one should feign to be asleep; surely these are guests come.&rsquo; He took his sword in his hand and went out, but saw no man. Then it came into his mind that some of the guests must have ridden on first to the house, and then gone back to meet them that rode behind the rest. Then he went along under the wood-pile and heard the din of folks riding into the house-garth from the north. He saw that there were nine women all in black clothes and with drawn swords in their hands. He heard also folks riding from the south into the garth. There were also nine women all in bright raiment and on white horses. Then Thidrande was minded to go back to the house and tell men of the sight, but now the black-clad women came up first and set upon him, and he defended himself manfully.

<p>But a long time later Thor-hall woke, and asked whether Thidrande was awake, and got no answer. Then he said that it must be too late. Then men went about the houses inside and then out of doors, and it was moonlight night and frosty weather, and they found Thidrande lying wounded, and he was carried indoors. And when men <corr sic=gat>got</corr> word of him, he told them all that had appeared to him. He died the same morning at daylight, and was laid in an howe after the old way.

<p>4. Afterwards there were held enquiries of the movements of men, but there were none known likely to be Thidrande&apos;s enemies. Hall asked Thor-hall what he thought would come of this wonderful portent that had happened. Thor-hall answered, &lsquo;I do not know, but I can guess this, that these women can have been no others than the fetches of you and your kinsmen, and I think that there will come about a change of faith here, and that very shortly there will come a better faith hither to this land. And I believe that these fairies <hi>or</hi> spirits of yours, who follow the old faith, must have known of the change of faith beforehand, and therewithal that ye and your kindred would cast them off: and it must be that they could not bear to get no tribute of you before, and therefore they have taken Thidrande as their own share; but the brighter<note n=1 id=n419.1>biartare, emend.; betre, Cd.</note> spirits must have wished to help him, and not been able to come in time to do so. Albeit ye kinsmen that shall hold the unknown faith, which they forebode and follow, shall be blessed by them.&rsquo; But Hall felt the death of his son Thidrande so much that he could not rest any longer at the homestead at Temple, and then he moved his dwelling to Thwart-water.

<p>5. It came to pass once at Thwart-water, when Thor-hall the Diviner was there on a visit with Hall, that Hall lay in a berth and Thor-hall on another bed in the same room, and there was a window-hole in the berth, and one morning when they both awoke, Thor-hall fell a laughing. Said Hall, &lsquo;What art thou laughing at?&rsquo; Thor-hall answered, &lsquo;I am laughing because I see every hillock opening and every living thing big or small trussing up his baggage, and making flitting-day of it.&rsquo; And a little later these tidings [the Change of Faith] came about which shall now be told.


<pb id=pb420 n=420>
<div1 id=s3.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 3.</ab> THE LIVES OF THE FIRST SEVEN BISHOPS OF SCALHOLT.</head>

<p>The author of <hi>Hunger-waker</hi>, as we dub him from his most important work, we know only from his own words as the contemporary of bishops Thorlac and Paul, as living in Scalholt, and as being in the household of bishop Paul. He must have been a friend or dependent of bishop Thorlac, and he was at his funeral, hearing Gizor&apos;s address, as it appears from his own words. Of all those whom he mentions in his works as present during the scenes he recounts there is none whom we could with certainty identify with him; it is easier, indeed, to show whom he is not than whom he is.

<p>From the words of his Life of Bishop Paul (ch. xv) it would seem that he was of near kin to that bishop, who did not however leave him any particular legacy, but apparently recommended him to the bounty of his children, who were well enough off to provide for such persons. Very possibly therefore he was not of the bishop&apos;s own blood, but of his wife&apos;s; hence the bishop would not be bound in any way to do more than make some such provision for him as he would for any other of his friends and chaplains. Thorlac, Herdis&apos; brother (d. 1240), who was comforted by the bishop after Herdis&apos; death, is perhaps a little too young to have written these Lives, but he might be the man if he were not born later than 1170. (See <hi>Sturlunga Pedigrees</hi>, vol. ii. 485, the <hi>Hitar-dale family</hi>.) In Aron&apos;s Saga he is called &lsquo;gofug-menne mikit&rsquo; and &lsquo;vitr maðr, heill vinom sínom, ok iamnan at ráðom sóttr.&rsquo; The muffled way in which the terrible story of the death of bishop Magnus is told (the host was Thorlac&apos;s grandfather) would suit one of the Hitar-dale family. How it contrasts, indeed, with Sturla o&apos; Hwam&apos;s banter, Sturl. i. pp. 68&ndash;69!

<p>His work&mdash;the Lives of the First Seven Bishops of Scalholt&mdash;reaches us in three separate pieces, which we believe must have been composed at different dates, namely, Hunger-waker, Thorlac&apos;s Life, and Paul&apos;s Life, of which Thorlac&apos;s was possibly the first and Paul&apos;s certainly the last written. Thorlac&apos;s Life was written probably by order or desire of some great man, and it would seem that this task led the author on to set down the earlier bishops&apos; lives, chiefly resting them upon the recollections of Gizor Hallsson, who died aged c. 82, July 6, 1206, and who in his long life had seen and known all the bishops save the first two that are mentioned in <hi>Hunger-waker</hi>. Thorlac the first had been his foster-father, and he had stood at the graves of him and all his successors till his own death.

<pb id=pb421 n=421><p><hi>St. Thorlac&apos;s Life</hi> we should put shortly before 1206, the date of Gizor&apos;s death, and after 1200, when the great event of his canonization by national desire in 1200 took place, though the bishop died in 1193. The frequent, though somewhat laboured, citations from the Bible and the pious remembrances it contains make it a charming work.

<p><hi>Hunger-waker</hi> would claim priority if we consider the words of the last paragraph as referring to the date of composition, rather than to the arrangement of the lives in order in the author&apos;s autograph. There is also a naïveté about the style of this which is distinct from the riper and fuller style of bishop Paul&apos;s Life, with its more realistic atmosphere. The language of the last paragraph seems conclusive as to the author of Hunger-waker being also the author of Thorlac&apos;s Life. Whether the Hunger-waker was composed in Gizor&apos;s lifetime or after his death depends upon the way one understands the Prologue, § 2. Gizor is not referred to as &lsquo;the <hi>late</hi>,&rsquo; nor any precise form of words used such as are appropriate to the mention of the honoured dead. Gizor had left Scalholt before his death, and it may well be that this book was the result of Gizor&apos;s last conversations and reminiscences. If so the work should date from c. 1200&ndash;1206, about the same date as Thorlac&apos;s Life, and there cannot be much interval between them whichever be put first.

<p>The date of bishop Paul&apos;s Life must be after Nov. 1211, the date of his death, but not very long one would say. The style is more natural and homely and of less effort. That the author formed one of the bishop&apos;s household, and that he writes from personal knowledge, his words show. That the author of this Life was the author of Hunger-waker none have doubted: even the Editor of 1778 saw that it was so. The very fact that the author slurs over the political life of Thorlac, and keeps to his saintly or religious life, is an additional proof of his identity, for, to a friend of bishop Paul, the contests which Thorlac waged would be such delicate ground as could hardly be stirred during Paul&apos;s life without his grave displeasure, for Ragneid was bishop Paul&apos;s mother, and John Loftson his father.

<p>The chronology followed is that which, from its being followed by Abbot Carl in Sverri&apos;s Saga, we have before called the Thingore system, its peculiarity being that the birth of Christ is dated seven years earlier than in the commonly received system. Thus bishop Paul, according to this reckoning, died 1204, not, as we should count it, 1211. It is possible that the Hunger-waker author was the originator of this system, which was followed by several Icelandic writers. The Second Biographer of Thorlac does <hi>not</hi> use this system, but adjusts the dates of the earlier Life to the received chronology. The Hunger-waker author knew Are&apos;s works, uses Libellus and cites it, and has borrowed from Are the system of summing up an epoch in a curious annalistic way with synchronisms.

<p>Of Hunger-waker and Paul&apos;s Life we find no mention by any author or in any catalogue till the Revival of Learning in Iceland, and as for the Life of Thorlac, which occurs in several inventories, it seems to be the 13th-century interpolated edition of this work, not the original A text.

<pb id=pb422 n=422><p>When Hunger-waker came to be known it excited some attention, and John Egilsson was spurred on not only to abstract it, but to write on its pattern, or rather on its suggestion, the Lives of the Bishops of the Reformation&mdash;a curious instance of the influence a good book will exercise long years after all it dealt with has passed away, the form and spirit only remaining. John does not imitate his prototype in style, but runs on in his own babbling way in the simple, almost childish, style of a pioneer of letters.

<p>The Hunger-waker text depends upon a single <hi>lost</hi> vellum, of which there is no mention or trace whatever till after 1600. If it had been lost before then we should have no suspicion that such a work had ever existed. In the year 1601 John Egilsson made an abstract of it (AM. 110, 8<hi rend=sup>o</hi>, autograph), and in the next following years (1601 to 1606) composed, in imitation of it, his Continuation of it, as he calls his Lives of Bishops. Errors in common tend to show that the vellum he abstracted from was the same from which the complete copies were afterwards taken. Next it comes into Biorn o&apos; Scardsa&apos;s hands: he made extracts from it of which we have made use in checking the later copies. The first full copy extant (AM. 380) dates from 1641, and is by one of bishop Thorlac Sculason&apos;s copyists. The next is by John Gizorarson, 1643, AM. 205, fol. But the one upon which our text rests is AM. 379, 4<hi rend=sup>o</hi>, a fine vellum copy made for bishop Thorlac in 1654. Whether it was taken from the lost archetype or not we cannot tell, but most probably it was. No description of the lost archetype has reached us, but it must have been a good and old MS., though not wanting in copyist&apos;s mistakes and omissions.


<figure id=p0422 rend="image(images/p0422.png)">

<!--
                         + A (lost).
                              |
+=================+=============+==============+=================+
|                 |             |              |                 |
AM. 379,      AM. 205,       AM. 380,        Biorn,       John Egilsson&apos;s,
1654,        J. G. 1643,   vellum, 1641,    c. 1630&ndash;40,        1601,
  \==============|==================/        extracts.        abstract.
            complete.
-->

</figure>


<p>From these three complete copies others were taken, and there are about fifteen paper copies of various dates, but of no authority, none being taken from A.

<p>The vanishing of A is a mysterious phenomena, such as occurs more than once in the history of Icelandic MSS., e.g. Sturla&apos;s Landnama-book, Are&apos;s Libellus, Bishop Paul&apos;s Lives. One is tempted to think that some such general catastrophe as a fire or wreck or accident in landing goods must be accountable for it. If the vellums had suffered in an ordinary way by being cut up for binding some shred must have remained.

<p>The case of bishop Thorlac&apos;s Life is somewhat different; the material is a little fuller, as we might have expected from the popularity of its subject. Our text rests for the earlier part on the Stockholm MS., <hi>Holm.</hi> 5, fol., a complete Icelandic vellum copy of the original Saga taken about 1359&ndash;60, as we can tell from a list of bishops and abbots it contains. The <pb id=pb423 n=423>last bishop mentioned is Gurth, &lsquo;who hath been bishop nine years.&rsquo; Now Gurth was bishop 1349&ndash;60, hence this entry was made 1359. The last abbot recorded is abbot Eyiolf of Thyckwa-by, who ruled from 1352&ndash;77, which is confirmatory of the former date, for the years of his abbacy are not given.

<p>The history of this MS. is as follows. It left Iceland in 1656 as a gift from bishop Bryniulf to Mr. Sefeld, a collector of books who lived in Zealand. On his famous campaign against Copenhagen in 1659, Carl Gustaf bought the fine library of Sefeld, and on his return home incorporated the whole collection into his own Royal Library, where the Thorlac MS. now stands bound in white vellum, a stately volume. It contains other bishops&apos; Lives besides that of Thorlac, and is indeed a kind of Corpus of Icelandic Ecclesiastical History. Ere it left Iceland John Gizorarson had copied it, c. 1643, and his copy, which is of no value seeing that we have the original, is numbered AM. 205. In AM. 383 are small fragments of Thorlac&apos;s Life, which give us some help. One, of two leaves, (<hi>a</hi>) supplies the story of Macan not found in Cod. Holm.

<p>The editor of the second Life (see Introduction to § 5) used a copy of A, into which he stuck his fresh &lsquo;thattr&rsquo; or episode. This copy he used freely, abridging, loosely transcribing, but otherwise adding nothing. It is of great value in establishing the full text of A. We have used it, correcting by it casual errors or slips in our A, picking out whatever bears mark of being original. We mark it B.

<p>For the first two-thirds of Thorlac&apos;s Life, Holm. 5 is our authority, but as we find towards the end of this MS., as so often happens in these big vellums, the scribe has flagged and betaken himself to abridging instead of faithfully copying in extenso the original before him. Hence we have to turn to B to get the complete original text.

<p>Of the Bishops&apos; Lives there were many paper transcripts in correlation, but no printed edition till 1778, when at Copenhagen appeared the editio princeps of Hunger-waker and Paul, with the tale of Thorwald Codransson, and Latin translations.

<p>The second edition is that by the editor in vol. i. of Biskopa Sögur, which also contains the editio princeps of Thorlac&apos;s Life. This volume came out in three fascicules&mdash;one in the spring of 1856, the second in the spring of 1857, and the last, with introduction to the whole, in 1858. In the first fascicule was comprised Hunger-waker, which was the editor&apos;s prentice-essay in the handling of texts. It was a tough job, and he made it harder by giving readings of more MSS. than was necessary or useful. This volume was printed under the plan and guidance of Mr. John Sigurdsson at the cost of the Icelandic Literary Society, Mr. Sigurdsson himself editing Christne Saga, the rest of the volume, with the introduction, being left to the editor.

<p>It is no wonder, considering the foundation for the text of these Bishops&apos; Lives, that there should be many places which must be corrected and emended to make sense. In this respect these biographies are in the same position as many of the Greek and Latin classics and unlike <pb id=pb424 n=424>most other Icelandic works. The present edition is the first in which these textual problems have been at least attempted.

<p>The text of bishop <hi>Paul&apos;s Life</hi> rests, like Hunger-waker, upon a single early vellum of which no notice or record is given, and which mysteriously disappears without a trace. John Egilsson knew no Life of Paul, hence it cannot have stood on the same vellum as Hunger-waker. The first proof of its existence is the copy of 1643, made by John Gizorarson into the same book as Hunger-waker, AM. 205. It is not so trustworthy as might be wished for, John being rather free in his handling of MSS., the second independent copy being now and again closer to the original. It is in poor state and badly penned, &lsquo;a botch of a copy,&rsquo; as Arne Magnusson somewhat unjustly calls it, now numbered AM. 384. Since 1778 one leaf of it has dropped out and been lost (probably in the hands of the editor of 1778; for it was missing in 1856), for we know that this MS. was used and the lost leaf cited in the editio princeps of Copenhagen of that year. The original MS. must have been a good vellum and an old one.

<figure id=p0424 rend="image(images/p0424.png)">

<!--
                            + A (lost).
                               |
                      ================
                      |               |
                AM. 384 chart.     AM. 205,
                                 J. G. 1643.
-->

</figure>


<p>A couple of instances from the very preface to Hunger-waker will show the necessity of the present edition and the kind of difficulty which we have had to meet in making it. The 1858 edition reads in Prol. § 5 &lsquo;tilgert,&rsquo; which runs in the MS. &lsquo;tilg&apos;t,&rsquo; but this makes no meaning, and is a mere copyist&apos;s error for &lsquo;telgt.&rsquo; The rare verb &lsquo;telgja&rsquo; was not known to the copyist who wrote down the common &lsquo;tilg&apos;t.&rsquo; Again, Prol. § 9, the old editions read &lsquo;þaðan at um vesa,&rsquo; following their MSS., but this makes no sense, and is merely the scribe&apos;s misreading for &lsquo;þar annt um uesa;&rsquo; the archetype must have read &lsquo;þ&#x0303;annt,&rsquo; which the scribe misread &lsquo;þ&#x0303;anat.&rsquo; Ch. <hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 10, þat <hi>for</hi> jol, and so on.

<p>Nor have the copyists been content to make this class of faults; they have done worse, omitted lines and words in several places. For example, in the account of Hall&apos;s travels (Hungrv. 5. 1) they have made a jumble of words by omitting a characteristic phrase of the original which luckily the context helps one to restore, but there are some places where we have no means of correcting their evident mistakes.

<p>In the matter of spelling we have followed the analogy of the Miracle-book (AM. 645), written under bishop Paul&apos;s own eyes at Scalholt, in writing his own name &lsquo;Pol&rsquo; and his father&apos;s &lsquo;Ioan,&rsquo; Giz&oelig;rr for Gizorr&mdash;these spellings representing the pronunciations of Paul and his contemporary the author of Hunger-waker. Cl&oeacute;ngr, Ann. Reg. s. a. 1151; Cl&oelig;íngr, s. a. 1176; Cloingus, the Lat. Legend, Bs. i. 294; but Cl&ocedil;ngr, Bs. i. 355, bottom.




<pb id=pb425 n=425>
<note place=margin>[59: 1.]</note>

<div2 lang=is id=s3.3.1 rend="align-with(en.hungrvoco)">
<head>HER BYRJAR HUNGRVOCO.</head>


<p>[<hi lang=la>Prologus.</hi>]

<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<p n=0.1><anchor id=a425.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> B&oelig;kling þenna kalla-ek <hi rend=sc>Hunger-voco</hi>: af þvi at svá <anchor id=a425.2>mon m&aolig;rgom m&aolig;nnom ó-fróðom ok þó vitrom<note place=apparatus id=an425.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Emend.; ovitrum, Cd.</note> gefet <anchor id=a425.3>vesa, þeim es hann hafa yfer faret, at miklo mundo<note place=apparatus id=an425.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> miklu meirr, Cd.</note> g&oelig;rr vilja vita <anchor id=a425.4>upp-r&aoacute;s ok æve þeirra merkis-manna, es her verðr fátt frá sagt <anchor id=a425.5>í þesse skr&aoacute;. En ek hefe þó nálega &aolig;llo við sleget, at ríta, þat<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a425.6>sem ek hefe í minne fest.

<p n=0.2><anchor id=a425.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hefe-ek af því þenna b&oeacute;kling saman settan, at eige falle mer <anchor id=a425.8>með &aolig;llo or minne þat es ek heyrða af þesso mále segja enn fróða <anchor id=a425.9>mann Giz&oelig;r Hallz son, ok enn nockora menn aðra merkelega, hafa <anchor id=a425.10>í frás&aolig;gor f&oeacute;rt.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p><anchor id=a425.11>Þat berr ok annat til þessa rits: at teygja til þess unga menn at <anchor id=a425.12>kynnasc várt mál, at ráða þat es á Norr&oeacute;no er ritið, l&aolig;g, eða s&aolig;gor, <anchor id=a425.13>eðr mann-fr&oeacute;ðe.

<p n=0.3><anchor id=a425.14><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Set-ek af því heldr þetta á skr&aoacute; an annan fróðleik, þann es áðr <anchor id=a425.15>es á skrár settr, at mer sýnesc mínom b&aolig;rnom eðr &aolig;ðrom ung-mennom<note place=apparatus id=an425.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> ungom monnom hverneg framast hverneg eðr m. hv. hætti.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a425.16>vesa í skyldasta lage at vita framazt, með hverjom hætte <anchor id=a425.17>at her hefer magnasc Cristnen, eðr byscops-stólar setter vereð á <anchor id=a425.18>Íslande; ok vita síðan hverer merkis-menn byscoparner hafa veret, <anchor id=a425.19>es her hafa vereð, ok ek ætla nú frá at segja.

<p n=0.4><anchor id=a425.20><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En þat skylder mik til at ríta, hverso staðrenn hefer eflsc ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a426.1><pb id=pb426 n=426><note place=margin>[59: 1]</note>magnasc í Scála-holte, eðr um þeirra manna ráð es hann hafa <anchor id=a426.2>varð-veittan, es<note place=apparatus id=an426.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es]</ab> en, Cd.</note> ek hefe með Goðs miskunn alla gæfo af þeim hloteð <anchor id=a426.3>þessa heims.

<p n=0.5><anchor id=a426.4><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> En mik varer, at vitrom m&aolig;nnom mon þyckja b&oeacute;klingr þesse <anchor id=a426.5>iafn-<hi>g</hi>líkr sem horn-spánar-emne<note place=apparatus id=an426.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> spónar, Cd.</note>, af þvi at þat er ó-fimlegazt meðan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a426.6>van-g&oelig;rt es, en þá es all-fagrt es telgt<note place=apparatus id=an426.3><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>telgt]</ab> emend.; til g&oelig;rt, Cd. (til g<hi rend=sup>st</hi>).</note> es.

<p n=0.6><anchor id=a426.7><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> En þeir menn es svá henda gaman at þessom b&oeacute;klinge, <anchor id=a426.8>mego þat af nýta<note place=apparatus id=an426.4><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> anyta, Cd.</note>, at skemta ser við ok þeim &aolig;ðrom es lítilátlega <anchor id=a426.9>vilja til hlýða, heldr an hætta til hvat annat legsc fyrer <anchor id=a426.10>þá, es áðr þycker dauflegt; þvi at margr hefer þess raun, ef<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a426.11>hann leitar ser skammrar skemtanar, at þar k&oelig;mr epter á l&aolig;ng <anchor id=a426.12>áhyggja.

<p n=0.7><anchor id=a426.13><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Synesc mer þat ráð, at sá hafe af þessom fróðleik es ritenn<note place=apparatus id=an426.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> ritaðr, Cd.</note> es <anchor id=a426.14>hvatki es<note place=apparatus id=an426.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hvalki es]</ab> om. Cd.</note> bazt gegner, ok hann hender svá gaman at; ok varð-veite <anchor id=a426.15>þat efter á es si&aolig;lfom mon í geð falla, en felle þat niðr es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a426.16>hónom fellr eige í skap.

<p n=0.8><anchor id=a426.17><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En þeim sýnesc mer þat bazt sama, ef<note place=apparatus id=an426.7><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ef]</ab> es, Cd.</note> b&oeacute;ta vilja um þat, es <anchor id=a426.18>áðr þycker ómerkelega sagt vesa, ok þeir vito annat sannara, heldr <anchor id=a426.19>an þeir f&oeacute;re af<note place=apparatus id=an426.8><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>af]</ab> add. by conj.</note> þetta, eðr hafe at spotte, en vile eige eðr hafe eige <anchor id=a426.20>f&aolig;ng á um at b&oeacute;ta.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=0.9><anchor id=a426.21><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> En því hefe-ek iafnat þesso til horn-spánarens<note place=apparatus id=an426.9><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> spónsens, Cd. (here).</note>, at mer <anchor id=a426.22>sýnesc forkunnar-emne í vesa: en ek veit, at miok þarf um at <anchor id=a427.1><pb id=pb427 n=427><note place=margin>[60: 2.]</note>fegra; ok skal mer þar annt um vesa<note place=apparatus id=an427.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mer þar annt um vesa]</ab> emend.; ek þaðan at um vera, Cd.</note>, meðan ek em til f&oeacute;rr, um <anchor id=a427.2>at b&oeacute;ta.

<p n=0.10><anchor id=a427.3><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Verð-ek ok af því skyldogr til, at þat mun af mínom v&aolig;l&shy;dom <anchor id=a427.4>ok van-r&oeacute;kð ef þat es nockot í þesso mále sem rangt reynesc <anchor id=a427.5>þat es riteð es; en eige þeirra manna es ek þyckjomc þenna fróðleik<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a427.6>efter hafa.

<p n=0.11><anchor id=a427.7><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> En þat es forn orðz-kviðr, at &lsquo;Hús skal hiónom fá:&rsquo; sege-ek <anchor id=a427.8>af því fyrst hverso b&oeacute;renn hefer bygsc í Scála-holte; en síðan <anchor id=a427.9>frá þeim es staðenn hafa varð-veittan.



<p n=1.1><anchor id=a427.10><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Ketilbiorn</hi> enn Gamle bió at<note place=apparatus id=an427.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> á, Cd.</note> Mosfelle, ok átte mart<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a427.11>barna. Teitr hét sonr Ketilbiarnar; hann vas sá <anchor id=a427.12>gæfo-maðr, at hann bygðe þann b&oeacute; fyrstr es í Scála-holte heiter, es <anchor id=a427.13>nú es all-g&aolig;fgastr b&oeacute;r á &aolig;llo Íslande. Sví vas &aolig;nnor gæfa hans, at <anchor id=a427.14>hann átte at syne Giz&oelig;r enn Hvíta, es með Cristne kom til Íslannz, <anchor id=a427.15>ok bió í Scála-holte efter Teit f&aolig;ðor sínn. Giz&oelig;rr enn Hvíte átte<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a427.16>þriár konor: fyrst átte hann Halldóro, dóttor Hrólfs or Geitlande<note place=apparatus id=an427.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> Gaut. l., Cd.</note>; <anchor id=a427.17>þeirra dótter vas Vilborg, es átte Hialte Skeggja son<note place=apparatus id=an427.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sk. son]</ab> at Nupe í Eystra-hrepp (sic), add. AM. 110.</note>: Giz&oelig;rr átte <anchor id=a427.18>síðan Eyverska kono, es Þórdís hét, ok vas þeirra son Ketill, es <anchor id=a427.19>átte Þórh&aolig;llo Skafta dóttor. Gizorr átte síðan Þórdíse, dóttor <anchor id=a427.20>Þóroddz Goða á Hialla í Olfuse; ok &aoacute;tto þau mart barna.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a427.21><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þeirra son vas Ísleifr; hónom fylgðe Giz&oelig;rr útan, ok selde <anchor id=a427.22>hann til læringar abbadíse einne í borg þeirre es Herfurða heiter. <anchor id=a428.1><pb id=pb428 n=428><note place=margin>[61: 2.]</note>Isleifr kom svá til Íslannz at hann vas prestr ok vel lærðr. Hann <anchor id=a428.2>kvángaðesc, ok feck D&aolig;llo Þórvallz dóttor or Áse: þau g&aoacute;to þriá <anchor id=a428.3>sono: Giz&oelig;rr hét son þeirra es síðan vas byscop; annarr hét Teitr <anchor id=a428.4>es bió í Hauka-dale; þriðe hét Þórvaldr, es bió í Hraun-gerðe, <anchor id=a428.5>mikell h&aolig;fðinge. Giz&oelig;rr Hvíte lét g&oelig;ra ena fyrsto kirkjo í Scála-holte,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a428.6>ok vas þar grafenn at þeirre kirkjo; en Ísleifr bió í Scála-holte <anchor id=a428.7>efter f&aolig;ðor sínn.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a428.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ísleifr vas vænn maðr at álite, ok vin-sæll við alþýðo, ok alla <anchor id=a428.9>æve réttlátr ok ráðvandr, gi&aolig;foll ok góð-giarn, en aldri auðegr. En <anchor id=a428.10>es Ísleifr vas fimm-t&oelig;gr at aldre, ok Ísland hafðe eige fiarre<note place=apparatus id=an428.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> fyrre, Cd.</note> þvi<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a428.11>at lengð vereð cristið, þá vas hann beðenn til útan-ferðar, ok valðr <anchor id=a428.12>til byscops of allre alþýðo á Íslande. Síðan fór hann útan ok suðr <anchor id=a428.13>til Saxlannz, ok sótte heim Heinrek keisara Conraðs son, ok gaf <anchor id=a428.14>hónom hvíta-bi&aolig;rn, es komenn vas af Gr&oeacute;nalande<note place=apparatus id=an428.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gr&oeacute;nal.]</ab> AM. 110.</note>; ok vas þat <anchor id=a428.15>dýr en mesta g&oelig;rseme; en keisarenn feck Ísleife bréf sítt með innsigle<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a428.16>um allt velde sítt. Síðan fór hann til fundar við Leonem <anchor id=a428.17>papa. En pávenn sende bréf sítt Adalberto erki-byscope í Brimom<note place=apparatus id=an428.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> AM. 110; Bremen, Cd.</note>, <anchor id=a428.18>at hann skylde gefa Ísleife byscops-vígslo á Hvít-dróttens-dag; ok <anchor id=a428.19>kvezc pávenn þess vilja vænta með Goðs miskunn, at þá m&oelig;nde <anchor id=a428.20>lang-æst<note place=apparatus id=an428.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> langæðust, Cd.</note> tign vesa at þeim byscops-dóme, ef enn fyrste byscop være<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a428.21>vígðr til byscops á þeim dege, es Goð prýdde alla ver&aolig;ld í gift <anchor id=a428.22>Heilags Anda: ok vas Ísleifr vígðr til byscops á þeim dege at <anchor id=a428.23>boðe páva, af Adalberto erki-byscope í Brimom xiiij<note place=apparatus id=an428.5><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>xiiij]</ab> emend.; iiij, Cd.</note> nóttom fyrer <anchor id=a429.1><pb id=pb429 n=429><note place=margin>[62: 2.]</note>Columba-messo, ok feck erki-byscop hónom alla þá reiðo es hann <anchor id=a429.2>þurfte at hafa með byscops-tign, efter því sem pávenn sende orð <anchor id=a429.3>til ok keisarenn.

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a429.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Síðan fór Ísleifr byscop þat sama sumar til Íslannz, ok sette <anchor id=a429.5>byscops-stól sínn í Scála-holte. Hann hafðe nauð mikla á marga<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a429.6>vega í sínom byscops-dóme, fyr sakar ó-hlýðne manna. Má þat <anchor id=a429.7>af því merkja nockot í hverjom nauðom hann hefer veret fyr sakar <anchor id=a429.8>ó-trú ok ó-hlýðne, ok ó-siða<note place=apparatus id=an429.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> osiðu Cd.</note> sínna under-manna, at Log(s&aolig;go) <anchor id=a429.9>maðrenn átte m&oeacute;ðgor tvær; ok þá l&aolig;gðosc sumer menn út í <anchor id=a429.10>víking, ok á her-skip; ok m&aolig;rg endeme tóko menn þau<note place=apparatus id=an429.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þau]</ab> þu, Cd.</note> til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a429.11>&aolig;nnor, es nú m&oeacute;nde ó-d&oeacute;me þyckja, ef menn hende slíkt.

<p n=1.5><anchor id=a429.12><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Um daga Ísleifs byscops kómo út byscopar af &aolig;ðrom l&aolig;ndom, <anchor id=a429.13>ok buðo mart linara an Ísleifr byscop: urðo þeir því vin-sæler <anchor id=a429.14>við vánda menn; þar til es Adalbertus erki-byscop sende bréf <anchor id=a429.15>til Íslannz, ok bannaðe m&aolig;nnom alla þiónosto af þeim at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a429.16>þiggja; ok kvað þá suma vesa bann-setta; en alla í ó-leyfe síno <anchor id=a429.17>faret hafa.

<p n=1.6><anchor id=a429.18><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Um daga Ísleifs byscops kom út sá (byscop) es Kolr hét, ok <anchor id=a429.19>andaðesc hann her. Hann vas grafenn í Scála-holte; ok vas sú <anchor id=a429.20>kirkja her á lande fyrst prýdd í tigens mannz grefte, es at rétto<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a429.21>kallasc andleg móðer allra annarra vígðra húsa á Íslande.

<p n=1.7><anchor id=a429.22><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Ísleifr byscop hafðe ofallt ó-h&oeacute;gt bú fyre penninga; vóro <anchor id=a429.23>f&aolig;ng lítel, en at-sókn mikel; ok vas af því ervitt búet.

<pb id=pb430 n=430>
<note place=margin>[63: 2.]</note>

<p n=1.7.1 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a430.1><ab type=parNum>7. b.</ab> Marger menn seldo hónom sono sína til læringar, ok vóro þeir síðan <anchor id=a430.2>góder kenne-menn; en tveir urðo byscopar, Kolr í Vík austr í Norege, ok Ioan<note place=apparatus id=an430.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Ion, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a430.3>byscop at Hólom.


<p n=1.8><anchor id=a430.4><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En es Ísleifr hafðe byscop vereð xxiiij vet<hi>t</hi>r, þá tók hann sótt <anchor id=a430.5>á Alþinge<note place=apparatus id=an430.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á Alþ.]</ab> AM. 110; um alþ., Cd.</note> um messo, svá skiótt, at hann varð þegar at f&oeacute;ra<note place=apparatus id=an430.3>f&oeacute;ra] emend.; fara, Cd.</note> or<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a430.6>messo-klæðonom; ok fór þá í messo-klæðen Gothormr prestr <anchor id=a430.7>Finnolfs son or Laugar-dale at ráðe byscops; ok tók þar til <anchor id=a430.8>messonnar es byscop hvarf frá, ok lauk messonne. Síðan vas <anchor id=a430.9>byscop f&oeacute;rðr heim í Scála-holt, ok vas g&oelig;rt rúm hans í kirkjo. <anchor id=a430.10>Menn leitoðo þá efter heilræðom við hann, bæðe um byscops<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a430.11>kosning ok þá hlute aðra, es þeim þótte at skyldo þurfa um at <anchor id=a430.12>tala. En hann lagðe þau r&aoacute;ð til, at þeir skyldo biðja Gothorm <anchor id=a430.13>prest til útan-ferðar; ok talðe hann bazt til fallenn af þeim m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a430.14>es þá vóro samlender; en sagðe þó, at þeim m&oelig;nde seint auðet <anchor id=a430.15>byscops á Íslande ef þeir héte eige þvi, at vesa við hann s&oeacute;milegar,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a430.16>es síðarr k&oeacute;me til, an þeir hefðe við hann veret.

<p n=1.9><anchor id=a430.17><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Enn &oelig;fra hlut æve Ísleifs byscops bar marga hlute hónom til <anchor id=a430.18>handa, þá es miok birte g&oeacute;zko hans fyr þeim m&aolig;nnom es þat <anchor id=a430.19>kunno at skynja: af þvi at marger menn vóro þeir óðer f&oeacute;rðer <anchor id=a430.20>hónom til handa, es heiler gengo frá hans funde. Mungát blezaðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a430.21>hann þat es skiaðac vas í, ok vas þaðan frá vel dreckanda. Ok <anchor id=a430.22>mart annat þesso <hi>g</hi>líkt bar hónom til handa, þó<hi>tt</hi> ek greina nú eige <anchor id=a431.1><pb id=pb431 n=431><note place=margin>[64: 3.]</note>svá sér hvat, sem hann g&oelig;rðe, ok enom vitrostom m&aolig;nnom þótto <anchor id=a431.2>ener mesto kraftar fylgja.

<p n=1.10><anchor id=a431.3><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Ísleifr vas vígðr til byscops þá es hann vas fimm-t&oelig;gr at <anchor id=a431.4>aldre. Þá vas Haralldr Sigurðar son konongr yfer Norege. Ísleifr <anchor id=a431.5>byscop andaðesc á Dróttens-dege í kirkjo at Scála-holte at miðjom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a431.6>dege, iij<note place=apparatus id=an431.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>iij]</ab> emend.; iiij, Cd.</note> nóttom fyr Seljo-manna-messo. Þá hafðe hann byscop <anchor id=a431.7>veret xxiiij vet<hi>t</hi>r, ok vas hann grafenn hiá leiðe Kols byscops. Þá <anchor id=a431.8>vas liðet frá Hingat-burðe Christi <hi rend=sc>m</hi> lxx iij &aoacute;r.

<p n=1.11><anchor id=a431.9><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Þess es geteð, at byscopar kómo út hingat til Íslannz um <anchor id=a431.10>daga Ísleifs byscops: en Friðrekr einn kom áðr út, sá es s&aolig;gor sé<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a431.11>frá g&oelig;rvar. En þesser hafa svá út komet, at menn h&oelig;lzt skyn á <anchor id=a431.12>vitað:&mdash;

<p><anchor id=a431.13>Ioan byscop enn Írske; ok hafa þat sumer menn fyr satt, at hann <anchor id=a431.14>f&oeacute;re síðan til Vindlannz, ok sn&oelig;re þar m&aolig;rgom m&aolig;nnom til Goðs; <anchor id=a431.15>ok vas síðan tekenn ok barðr, ok h&oelig;ggnar af bæðe hendr ok f&oeacute;tr,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a431.16>ok h&aolig;foðet síðarzt; ok fór með þeim pínengom til Goðs.

<p><anchor id=a431.17>Enn þriðe byscop kom til Íslannz Biarnharðr Vilraðs son, es <anchor id=a431.18>kallaðr vas enn Bókvíse, ok sumer menn segja at af Englande være, <anchor id=a431.19>ok hafðe fylgt Óláfe enom Helga; ok hafe síðan at hans r&aoacute;ðom <anchor id=a431.20>faret til Íslannz.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p><anchor id=a431.21>Enn fiórðe vas Rudolfr byscop, es sumer segja Ulfr héte, ok <anchor id=a431.22>være kynjaðr or Rúðo or Englande. Hann vas xix vetr á Íslande, <anchor id=a431.23>ok bió á B&oeacute; í Borgar-firðe.


<pb id=pb432 n=432><note place=margin>[65: 4.]</note>

<p><anchor id=a432.1>Fimmte kom til Íslannz Heinrekr byscop ok vas tvá vetr á Íslande.

<p><anchor id=a432.2>Enn sétte vas Biarnharðr byscop enn Saxnezke<note place=apparatus id=an432.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Saxlenzke, Cd.</note>; ok vas með <anchor id=a432.3>Magnúse konunge enom Góða Óláfs syne. Hann fór síðan til <anchor id=a432.4>Íslannz, ok vas her xx vet<hi>t</hi>r. Hann hafðe tvá bústaðe í Vatz-dale, <anchor id=a432.5>at Gilj-&aoacute; ok Steins-st&aolig;ðom. Hann vígðe marga hlute, þá es m&aolig;rg<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a432.6>merke hafa á<note place=apparatus id=an432.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á]</ab> at, B.</note> orðet, kirkjor ok cloccor, brúar<note place=apparatus id=an432.3><ab type=textRef>brúar]</ab> B; brúr, Cd.</note> ok brunna, v&aolig;ð ok <anchor id=a432.7>v&aolig;tn, bi&aolig;rg ok bi&aolig;llor; ok þyckja þesser hluter hafa birt sannar <anchor id=a432.8>iartegner<note place=apparatus id=an432.4><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sannar iart.]</ab> emend.; sanna tign, Cd.</note> hans g&oeacute;zko. Biarnharðr vas á Íslande meðan Haralldr <anchor id=a432.9>konungr Sigurðar son vas í Norege, þvi at þeir vóro eige sam-sátter. <anchor id=a432.10>Síðan fór hann útan ok til handa Óláfe konunge Kyrra, syne<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a432.11>Harallz; ok síðan fór hann til Róms at b&oeacute;n konungs, ok friðaðe <anchor id=a432.12>fyr &aolig;ndoðom. En es hann kom aftr, skipaðe konungr hann byscop <anchor id=a432.13>í Seljo; en síðan fór hann í Bi&aolig;rgyn ok andaðesc þar; ok es ein-mælt, <anchor id=a432.14>at hann hafe veret enn meste merkis-maðr.

<p n=1.12><anchor id=a432.15><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Á d&aolig;gom Ísleifs byscops urðo m&aolig;rg ok stór tíðende. Þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a432.16>varð í Norege fall ens Helga Óláfs konungs: þá varð ok andlát <anchor id=a432.17>Magnúss konungs ens Góða, sonar Óláfs konungs; ok andaðesc <anchor id=a432.18>hann í Danm&aolig;rk, en lík hans vas f&oeacute;rt norðr í Þróndheim til <anchor id=a432.19>Níðar-óss.&mdash;Þeir &aolig;ndoðosc báðer áðr an Ísleifr var byscop.&mdash;En <anchor id=a432.20>síðan (es) hann vas byscop, fell Haralldr konungr Sigurðar son<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a432.21>á Englande; ok lítlo síðarr Haralldr Goðina son. Þá andaðesc <anchor id=a432.22>Magnús konungr son Harallz Sigurðar sonar; ok Sveinn Ulfs son <anchor id=a433.1><pb id=pb433 n=433><note place=margin>[66: 5.]</note>Dana konungr .....<note place=apparatus id=an433.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>....]</ab> something is missing here.</note> ok Þórkell Eyjolfs son; Geller Bolverks <anchor id=a433.2>son; Þórsteinn Cugga son; Snorre Goðe, ok aðrer mikels-háttar <anchor id=a433.3>menn.

<p n=2.1><anchor id=a433.4><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>GIS&OElig;RR</hi> son Ísleifs byscops vas f&oeacute;ddr í Scála-holte; <anchor id=a433.5>en hann vas lærðr á Saxlande, ok vígðr til prestz<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a433.6>þegar á unga aldre. En es hann kom til Íslannz, þá kvángaðesc <anchor id=a433.7>hann, ok feck Steinunnar Þórgríms dóttor, ok áðr hafðe átta Þórer <anchor id=a433.8>Brodda son, ok bioggo þau fyrst at Hofe í Vápna-firðe.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a433.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Giz&oelig;rr vas mikell maðr vexte ok vel bols-vexte, biart-eygr ok <anchor id=a433.10>nockot opin-eygr, tígolegr í yfer-bragðe, ok allra manna góð-giarnaztr,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a433.11>rammr at afle, ok forvitre<note place=apparatus id=an433.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> forvitr, Cd.</note>. Giz&oelig;rr vas al-g&oelig;rr at ser um <anchor id=a433.12>alla hlute þá es karl-maðr átte at ser at hafa: hann vas far-maðr <anchor id=a433.13>mikell enn fyrra hlut æve sínnar, meðan Ísleifr lifðe, ok vas <anchor id=a433.14>iamnan mikels virðr, hvar sem hann kom, ok vas tignom m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a433.15>á hende es hann vas útan-lannz. Haraldr konungr Sigurðar son<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a433.16>vas þá konungr í Norege, ok mælte hann þeim orðom um<note place=apparatus id=an433.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>um]</ab> við, Cd.</note> Giz&oelig;r, <anchor id=a433.17>at hónom kvasc svá sýnasc til, at hann m&oelig;nde bazt til fallenn at <anchor id=a433.18>bera hvert tignar-nafn sem hann hlyte. Til Róms fóro þau bæðe <anchor id=a433.19>hión, áðr þau f&oeacute;re til Íslannz.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a433.20><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Giz&oelig;rr vas eige samlendr þá (es) faðer hans andaðesc, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a433.21>kom hann út annat sumar fyrer Alþinge í Rangár-óse, ok vas á <anchor id=a433.22>skipe nockorar nætr, ok vilde eige til þings ríða, meðan engi vas <anchor id=a433.23>til byscops k&oelig;renn á þingeno. En h&aolig;fðingjarner b&aoacute;ðo Gothorm <anchor id=a433.24>prest til útan-ferðar efter því sem þeim þótte Ísleifr byscop helzt <anchor id=a434.1><pb id=pb434 n=434><note place=margin>[67: 5.]</note>hafa á kveðet<note place=apparatus id=an434.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á kveðet]</ab> aformat, Cd.</note>; ok varð þat um síðer at hann iátte því, ef eige þ&oeacute;tte <anchor id=a434.2>&aolig;nnor f&aolig;ng vildre á vesa. En es Giz&oelig;rr spurðe þat, at Gothormr <anchor id=a434.3>prestr vas ráðenn til útan-ferðar, þá reið hann til þings. En es <anchor id=a434.4>Giz&oelig;rr kom til þings, þá geck Gothormr prestr á hlaðet fyrer <anchor id=a434.5>kirkjo, ok lýste því fyrer alþýðo manna, at enge kostr være á hans<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a434.6>útan-ferð, síðan Giz&oelig;rar vas við kostr. Sn&oelig;re þá alþýðan at <anchor id=a434.7>Giz&oelig;re ok b&aoacute;ðo hann útan-ferðar; en hann talðesc undan á marga <anchor id=a434.8>vega. En þó kom þar um síðer<note place=apparatus id=an434.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> iataðe, Cd. (here and oftener).</note>, at hann iátte at ganga under <anchor id=a434.9>þann vanda: en aller h&aolig;fðingjar héto hónom, at halda hlýðne um <anchor id=a434.10>&aolig;ll Goðs boðorð, þau es hann byðe, ef hónom yrðe byscops-vígslo<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a434.11>auðet.

<p n=2.4><anchor id=a434.12><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Síðan fór hann útan þat (et) sama sumar. En es hann kom <anchor id=a434.13>til Saxlannz, þá vas allt embætte teket af Liemaro<note place=apparatus id=an434.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Lienarðo, Cd.</note> erki-byscope; <anchor id=a434.14>fór hann þá á fund Gregorii páva, ok sagðe hónom allan mála-v&aolig;xt <anchor id=a434.15>sínnar ferðar, ok svá vandræðe þau, sem um vas at vesa á<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a434.16>marga vega. En pávenn sende þá Giz&oelig;r til handa Hardvig erki-byscope <anchor id=a434.17>í Magada-borg á Saxlande, ok bauð at hann skylde gefa <anchor id=a434.18>hónom byscops-vígslo; en hann tók við hónom með mikelle s&oeacute;mð <anchor id=a434.19>ok virðingo, ok vígðe hann til byscops iiij nóttom fyre Mário-messo <anchor id=a434.20>ena síðare.&mdash;Hann vas þá fert&oelig;gr at aldre,&mdash;ok feck erki-byscop<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a434.21>hónom þat allt es hann þurfte bráðast til nauðsynja.

<p n=2.5><anchor id=a434.22><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Efter þat fór Gizorr byscop út til Íslannz, ok tók &aolig;ll alþýða <anchor id=a434.23>feginsamlega við hónom. Hann tók tign ok virðing svá mikla, <anchor id=a435.1><pb id=pb435 n=435><note place=margin>[67: 6.]</note>þegar snemmendiss byscopsdóms síns, ok<note place=apparatus id=an435.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok]</ab> read at?</note> svá vilde hverr maðr <anchor id=a435.2>sitja ok standa sem hann bauð, ungr ok gamall, sæll ok fát&oeacute;kr, <anchor id=a435.3>konor ok karlar; ok vas rétt at segja, at hann vas bæðe konungr <anchor id=a435.4>ok byscop yfer landeno meðan hann lifðe.

<p n=2.6><anchor id=a435.5><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Hann hafðe eige allt land í Scála-holte til ábúðar fyrst<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a435.6>nockora stund, af þvi at Dalla móðer hans vilde búa á sínom hlut <anchor id=a435.7>lannzens meðan hon lifðe. En es hon vas &aolig;ndot, ok byscop hlaut <anchor id=a435.8>allt land, þá lagðe hann þat allt til kirkjo þeirrar, sem þar es í <anchor id=a435.9>Scála-holte, ok hann sialfr hafðe g&oelig;ra láteð, þrí-t&oelig;ga at lengð, ok <anchor id=a435.10>vígðe Petro<note place=apparatus id=an435.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Petre, Cd.</note> Postola; ok m&aolig;rg g&oeacute;ðe &aolig;nnor lagðe Giz&oelig;rr byscop<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a435.11>til þeirrar kirkjo, bæðe í l&aolig;ndom ok lausa-fé; ok kvað á síðan, at <anchor id=a435.12>þar skylde of-allt byscops-stóll vesa meðan Ísland es bygt ok <anchor id=a435.13>Cristne má haldasc. Giz&oelig;rr byscop gaf til kirkjo í Scála-holte <anchor id=a435.14>purpura-h&aolig;kol hvítan, es þar hefer lenge síðan baztr veret; ok <anchor id=a435.15>margar g&oelig;rsimar aðrar.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=2.7><anchor id=a435.16><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þesser menn vóro sam-tíða Giz&oelig;re byscope: Sæmundr prestr <anchor id=a435.17>í Odda, es bæðe vas forvitre<note place=apparatus id=an435.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> forvitra, Cd.</note>, ok lærðr allra manna bazt. Annarr <anchor id=a435.18>Márcus Skeggja son l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr, es vas enn meste spekingr ok <anchor id=a435.19>skálld. Þeir báro r&aoacute;ð til samans, ok sótto at ráðe h&aolig;fðingja, at <anchor id=a435.20>þat yrðe l&aolig;g-teket, at menn tiundaðe<note place=apparatus id=an435.4><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tiundaðe]</ab> -uðo, Cd.</note> fé sítt á hverjom misserom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a435.21>ok allan l&aolig;g-v&aolig;xt fiár síns, svá sem í &aolig;ðrom l&aolig;ndom es títt, þar <anchor id=a435.22>sem Cristner menn<note place=apparatus id=an435.5><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>menn]</ab> þeir, Cd.</note> byggja. En með ráð<hi>a</hi>-leytne þeirra ok for&shy;t&aolig;lom <anchor id=a435.23>spaklegom, urðo þau mála-lok, at menn gengo under <anchor id=a436.1><pb id=pb436 n=436><note place=margin>[68: 6.]</note>tiundar-gialdet, ok skylde síðan skifta í fióra staðe: einn hlut til <anchor id=a436.2>handa byscope; annan til kirkna; þriðia hlut skyldo hafa kennemenn; <anchor id=a436.3>en fiórða hlut fát&oeacute;ker. Ok hefer eige annarr slíkr grund-v&aolig;llr <anchor id=a436.4>veret auðræða<note place=apparatus id=an436.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> auðraða, Cd.</note> ok h&oeacute;genda í Scála-hollte sem tiundar-gialdet, <anchor id=a436.5>þat er til lagðesc þá fyre vinsælð ok sk&aolig;rung-skap Giz&oelig;rar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a436.6>byscops.

<p n=2.8><anchor id=a436.7><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Steinunn Þórgríms dótter hafðe bús-forráð í Scála-holte fyr <anchor id=a436.8>innan stock meðan Giz&oelig;rr byscop réð fyrer stól<hi>e</hi>nom; en Dalla <anchor id=a436.9>meðan Ísleifr byscop lifðe.

<p n=2.9><anchor id=a436.10><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> En es Giz&oelig;rr byscop hafðe seteð at stól<hi>e</hi>nom xx vetr,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a436.11>eða því nær, þá felldo Norðlendingar b&oeacute;n at hónom, at þeir <anchor id=a436.12>skyldo ná at hafa byscop einn ser, ok setja þar byscops-stól annan <anchor id=a436.13>í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge, ok gefa til þess fiórðung byscopsdóms <anchor id=a436.14>síns<note place=apparatus id=an436.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok gefa ... síns]</ab> added by help of Libellus <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 5.</note> allan at aftektom, ok t&aolig;lðo þess v&aoacute;n at annat-hvárt munde <anchor id=a436.15>ván vesa<note place=apparatus id=an436.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>v&aoacute;n at ... ván vesa]</ab> somehow wrong.</note>, at sialdan eðr aldri munde vera byscops-laust í landeno<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a436.16>ef tveir være byscops-stólarner. Ok þá b&oeacute;n veitte Giz&oelig;rr byscop <anchor id=a436.17>með Goðe Norðlendingom; ok vas síðan valðr til byscops af Goðe <anchor id=a436.18>ok góðom m&aolig;nnom Ioan prestr Ogmundar son; ok hann fór útan <anchor id=a436.19>með bréfom Giz&oelig;rar byscops, ok sótte síðan á fund Paschalis <anchor id=a436.20>páva; ok vas hann vígðr til byscops af Oz&oelig;re erki-byscope í<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a436.21>Lunde í Skáneyjo ij nóttom fyrer Philippi messo ok Iacobi. Ioan <anchor id=a437.1><pb id=pb437 n=437><note place=margin>[69: 7.]</note>fór síðan til Íslannz, ok sette byscops-stólenn at Hólom í Hialta-dale <anchor id=a437.2>í Eyja-firðe.


<p n=2.10 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a437.3><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Giz&oelig;rr hafðe telja látið b&oelig;ndr á Íslande, þá es þingfarar-kaupe átto at <anchor id=a437.4>gegna; ok vóro þá .vij.c. í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge: en x.c. í Sunnlendinga-fiórðunge; <anchor id=a437.5>ix. c. í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge; en í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge xii.c., ok vas sá auðgastr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a437.6>at iofno mann-tale.


<p n=2.11><anchor id=a437.7><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> En es Giz&oelig;rr byscop vas orðenn half-áttr&oeacute;ðr, þá tók hann <anchor id=a437.8>þyngð svá mikla, at hann rétte<note place=apparatus id=an437.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>rétte]</ab> <hi>or</hi> reis.</note> eige or reckjo, ok hann vas eige <anchor id=a437.9>þing-f&oeacute;rr. Hann sende þá orð vinom sínom, ok &aolig;llom h&aolig;fðingjom <anchor id=a437.10>til Alþingess, at menn skyldo biðja Þorlák prest Rúnolfs-son til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a437.11>útan-ferðar: en hann talðesc undan, bæðe fyrer &oeacute;sko sakar ok <anchor id=a437.12>margra annarra hluta. En þó lauk svá því mále, at hann iátte at <anchor id=a437.13>ganga under þann vanda, ef þat være byscops ráð. Síðan lét <anchor id=a437.14>Giz&oelig;rr byscop búa ferð hans, unz hann vas at &aolig;llo vel búenn, ok <anchor id=a437.15>feck hónom bréf sítt á fund Oz&oelig;rar erki-byscops.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=2.12><anchor id=a437.16><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> En sótt elnaðe á hendr Giz&oelig;re byscope ok g&oelig;rðesc h&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a437.17>str&aolig;ng ok ó-h&oeacute;g; ok fello stór s&aoacute;r á h&aolig;rund hans allt at beine<note place=apparatus id=an437.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> allt at kné inn at beine, <hi>some</hi>, 378, 205.</note>, <anchor id=a437.18>ok fylgðo stór ó-h&oeacute;gende af verkjom. En es miok tók at hónom <anchor id=a437.19>at s&oeacute;kja, ok menn þóttosc heyra at beinen gn&aolig;troðo við hr&oeacute;r-ingarnar, <anchor id=a437.20>þá geck Steinunn húsfreyja at sæ<hi>i</hi>ngenne, ok spurðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a437.21>hverso þá skylde mætte mannz komet vesa, es heita skal fyrer <anchor id=a437.22>manne. En byscop svarar: &lsquo;Þvi at eins skal heita á Goð, at <anchor id=a437.23>aukesc of-allt mín ó-h&oeacute;gende, ef til þess es heiteð, meðan ek má <anchor id=a437.24>standasc; þvi at enge efne ero á því,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;at biðjasc <anchor id=a438.1><pb id=pb438 n=438><note place=margin>[70: 8.]</note>undan Goðs bardaga; es nálega mon komet á enda æve mínnar; <anchor id=a438.2>en genget áðr mart at sólo.&rsquo; Hann vas ok þá at spurðr hvar hann <anchor id=a438.3>vilde láta grafa sik; en hann svaraðe með viðr-komningo<note place=apparatus id=an438.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Emend.; viðr-kenningo, Cd.</note>, ok <anchor id=a438.4>miklo lítelæte: &lsquo;Grafeð ér mik hverge í nánder f&aolig;ðor mínom, <anchor id=a438.5>þvi at ek em þess eige verðr, at hvíla hónom nær.&rsquo; Síðan skipaðe<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a438.6>hann til allra hluta<note place=apparatus id=an438.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> alla hlute, Cd.</note>, efter því sem hann vilde at være, áðr an hann <anchor id=a438.7>andaðesc.

<p n=2.13><anchor id=a438.8><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Syner hans &aolig;ndoðosc aller fyrr an hann, nema B&aolig;ðvarr: <anchor id=a438.9>Gróa, dótter hans, lifðe efter hann, ok vas gift Katle Þórsteins <anchor id=a438.10>syne.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=2.14><anchor id=a438.11><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Giz&oelig;rr vas vígðr til byscops þá es hann vas fer-t&oelig;gr at aldre. <anchor id=a438.12>Þá vas Óláfr konungr Kyrre at Norege, son Harallz Sigurðar <anchor id=a438.13>sonar. Giz&oelig;rr byscop andaðesc þriðja dag vico xii nóttom fyrer <anchor id=a438.14>Columba-messo. Þá hafðe hann veret byscop xxxvi vetr. Hann <anchor id=a438.15>vas grafenn hiá f&aolig;ðor sínom. Þá vas liðet frá Hingat-burðe Christi<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a438.16>xi.c. ok xi &aoacute;r.

<p n=2.15><anchor id=a438.17><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Svá fell m&aolig;rgom manne nær andlát Giz&oelig;rar byscops, at <anchor id=a438.18>aldri geck or hug meðan þeir lifðo. En þat kom ásamt með <anchor id=a438.19>&aolig;llom m&aolig;nnom, at hans þóttosc aldri ið-gi&aolig;ld fá. Þat hefer ok <anchor id=a438.20>vereð allra vitra manna mál, at hann hafe af Goðs gift<note place=apparatus id=an438.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> guðs goðgift, Cd.; <hi>góð</hi>, repetition of God?</note> ok siálfs<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a438.21>síns atg&oelig;rve g&aolig;fgastr maðr veret á Íslande bæðe lærðra manna ok <anchor id=a438.22>ó-lærðra.

<p n=2.16 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a438.23><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> Á því áre es Giz&oelig;rr byscop andaðesc, þá andaðesc, ok Paschalis Papa, <pb id=pb439 n=439><note place=margin>[71: 9.]</note>ok Baldvine Iórsala konungr; Arnhallr Patriarche í Iorsala-borg; Alexius Girkja<note place=apparatus id=an439.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Libell.; Grikkja, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a439.1>konungr; Philippus Fracka konungr.

<p n=2.17 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a439.2><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> Þá g&oelig;rðesc ok óveðrátta mikel: þá vas sú hríð um Dimbildaga, at kennimenn <anchor id=a439.3>mátto eige veita tíðer at<note place=apparatus id=an439.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> á, Cd.</note> kirkjom fyr norðan land Fosto-dag enn Langa, ok <anchor id=a439.5>hóf upp knorr under Eyja-fiollom, ok sn&oelig;re á lofte<note place=apparatus id=an439.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> loft upp, Cd.</note>, ok kom hvolfande niðr; ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a439.6>lítill hlute manna mátte taka <hi>Corpus Domini</hi> á Páska-dagenn; en sumer urðo úte <anchor id=a439.7>dauðer<note place=apparatus id=an439.4><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dauðer]</ab> om. Cd.</note>. Onno hríð kom þá es menn riðo til Alþingis, ok drap fé manna fyr <anchor id=a439.8>norðan land. Þá braut ok kirkjo á Þingvelle, þá es Haralldr konungr Sigurðar son <anchor id=a439.9>hafðe við til fenget. Þat sumar kom til Íslannz xxxv skipa, en viii kómo(sc) til <anchor id=a439.10>Noregs um hausteð efter Michaelis-messo. Við þat óx svá mikell mann-fiolðe á<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a439.11>Íslande, at þat vas mikell ó-árans-auke í morgom heroðom.


<p n=2.18><anchor id=a439.12><ab type=parNum>18.</ab> Svá hugðesc at enom vitroztom m&aolig;nnom, at svá þótte drúpa<note place=apparatus id=an439.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> driupa, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a439.13>Ísland efter frá-fall Giz&oelig;rar byscops, sem Róma-borgar-ríke efter <anchor id=a439.14>(frá)-fall Gregori Páva. En frá-fall Giz&oelig;rar byscops bende til ættar<note place=apparatus id=an439.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bende til ættar]</ab> emend.; til ætlan, Cd.; <hi>or</hi> til aldr-tíla?</note> <anchor id=a439.15>um &aolig;ll ó-h&oeacute;gende á Íslande af ó-áran, bæðe í skipa-brotom ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a439.16>mann-tióne, ok fiár-skaða es því fylgðe; en efter þat ó-friðr ok <anchor id=a439.17>l&aolig;gleysor; ok á þat ofan mann-dauðr<note place=apparatus id=an439.7><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> -dauði, Cd.</note> sá um allt landet, at einge <anchor id=a439.18>hafðe slíkr orðet, síðan (es) landet vas bygt. Tveimr vetrom efter <anchor id=a439.19>lát Giz&oelig;rar byscops varð Hafliðe Márs son sárr á Alþinge; ok <anchor id=a439.20>varð eige um málet d&oeacute;mt þat sumar.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=2.19><anchor id=a439.21><ab type=parNum>19.</ab> B&aolig;ðvarr einn lifðe sona<note place=apparatus id=an439.8><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> son, Cd.</note> Giz&oelig;rar byscops þá es hann andaðesc; <anchor id=a439.22>en áðr &aolig;ndoðosc aðrer syner hans. Teitr, Ásgeirr, Þórðr ok <anchor id=a439.23>Ioan. Groa lifðe ok lenge síðan, ok varð nunna, ok andaðesc <anchor id=a439.24>á d&aolig;gom Kl&oeacute;ngs byscops.

<p n=2.20><anchor id=a439.25><ab type=parNum>20.</ab> Í byscops-dóme Giz&oelig;rar byscops urðo m&aolig;rg stór-tíðende:&mdash;Lát<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a439.26>ens Helga Knútz konungs á Fióne, ok Benedicts bróðor hans; <anchor id=a439.27>Vilhialma tveggia Engla kononga<note place=apparatus id=an439.9><ab type=lineNumRef>27.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Vilh. tv. E. kononga]</ab> emend.; andlát Vilhialms Engla ka (archetype, andlát Vilh. ii. Engla ka), Cd. and AM. 110.</note>; andlát Óláfs konungs Kyrra, <anchor id=a440.1><pb id=pb440 n=440><note place=margin>[72: 10.]</note>ok Hákonar Magnús sonar í Norege; fall Magnús konungs Berbeins <anchor id=a440.2>vestr á Írlande á Ulaztire; f&oeacute;rsla ens helga Nicholai byscops <anchor id=a440.3>í Bár; andlát Óláfs konungs Magnús sonar í Norege; líflát Magnús <anchor id=a440.4>iarls ens helga: andlát l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-manna, Márcúss, ok Ulf&shy;heðins; <anchor id=a440.5>ok Teitz Ísleifs sonar, ok annarra sona Ísleifs byscops;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a440.6>ellz upp-kváma í Heklo (fialle), ok m&aolig;rg &aolig;nnor stór-tíðende, þó <anchor id=a440.7>(at) her sé eige skrifoð.

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a440.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Þorlákr Runolfs</hi> son,&mdash;Þórleiks<note place=apparatus id=an440.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórleiks]</ab> Þorlaks, Cd.</note> sonar, Þórarens <anchor id=a440.9>sonar, Þórkels sonar Skota-kollz; ok sonr Hallfríðar, <anchor id=a440.10>Snorra dóttor, Carlsefnis sonar&mdash;vas f&oeacute;ddr upp með f&aolig;ðor sínom<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a440.11>í barn&oelig;sko; en hann vas lærðr í Hauka-dale. Hann vas snemmendis <anchor id=a440.12>skynsamr ok siðlátr, ok hog-þeckr kverjom góðom manne. <anchor id=a440.13>Hann vas bóknæmis-maðr<note place=apparatus id=an440.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bóknæmis-m.]</ab> emend.; bæna hallds maðr, Cd. and AM. 110.</note> mikell þegar á unga aldre, ok skiótr <anchor id=a440.14>í skilningom: hann vas lagðr til kenne-mann-skapar. Léttr vas <anchor id=a440.15>hann ok lítelátr ok ó-afskiftasamr; heil-ráðr ok heil-hogaðr við<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a440.16>alla þá es hiá hónom vóro; miúklátr ok miskunsamr við þá es <anchor id=a440.17>þess þurfto við; frænd-r&oeacute;kenn ok forsiáll í flestom hlutom, bæðe <anchor id=a440.18>fyre sína h&aolig;nd ok annarra. Þorlákr hafðe þá tvá vetr ens fiórða <anchor id=a440.19>tigar, es hánn vas til byscops k&oelig;renn; ok má af því marka hverr <anchor id=a440.20>maðr hann vas, es sá<note place=apparatus id=an440.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es sá]</ab> en sá, Cd.</note> maðr kaus hann til ens mesta vanda, es<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a440.21>vitraztr ok g&aolig;fgaztr vas, en hónom<note place=apparatus id=an440.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hónom]</ab> hann (trm for tr), Cd.</note> kunnaztr, es vas Giz&oelig;rr <anchor id=a440.22>byscop.

<pb id=pb441 n=441><note place=margin>[73: 11.]</note>

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a441.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þorlákr vas meðal-maðr vexte, lang-leitr ok liós-iarpr á hár; <anchor id=a441.2>þocka-góðr; en kallaðr ecke vænn maðr af alþýðonne, né all-sk&aolig;rogr <anchor id=a441.3>at á-varpe vel-flestra manna. En es hann kom útan-lannz, <anchor id=a441.4>vas þá<note place=apparatus id=an441.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas þá]</ab> vas þar?</note> svá á teket, at líteð munde mann-val vesa á landeno, ok <anchor id=a441.5>þeim sýndesc hann ó-sendelegr til slíkrar tignar. En hann svaraðe<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a441.6>sialfr, at eige k&oeacute;me þat til þess; ok kvað þat mest valda, at hann <anchor id=a441.7>hafðe<note place=apparatus id=an441.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hafðe]</ab> hefðe, Cd.</note> meirr leynt ann-m&aolig;rkom fyr m&aolig;nnom an Goðe; ok af <anchor id=a441.8>þessom sv&aolig;rom þóttosc menn vita, at hann m&oelig;nde vel til fallenn <anchor id=a441.9>vesa slíkrar tignar. En es hann kom á fund Oz&oelig;rar erki-byscops, <anchor id=a441.10>þá sá hann brátt hverr Þorlákr vas, ok tók við hónom með s&oeacute;mð<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a441.11>ok virðingo; en hafðe í nockora tregðo um vígslo hans; ok talðesc <anchor id=a441.12>eige kunna at setja h&aolig;foð á h&aolig;foð ofan. En þó, at orðsendingo <anchor id=a441.13>Giz&oelig;rar byscops, þá hét hann hónom vígslonne, ok vilde eige til <anchor id=a441.14>þess staðar vígja, es áðr vas annarr byscop at; ok bað hann kiósa <anchor id=a441.15>ser stað at hann være til vígðr: en leyfðe þó, at hann være í Scála-holte,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a441.16>ef Giz&oelig;rr byscop leyfðe hónom þat, ef hann være á lífe es <anchor id=a441.17>Þorlákr byscop k&oeacute;me út.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a441.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þorlákr vas vígðr til byscops iij nóttom fyrer Philippi messo <anchor id=a441.19>ok Iacobi, ok vas hann vígðr til staðar í Reykja-holte í Borgar-firðe. <anchor id=a441.20>Hann vas vígðr í Danm&aolig;rk xxx d&aolig;gom<note place=apparatus id=an441.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> daga?</note> fyrr an Giz&oelig;rr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a441.21>byscop andaðesc í Scála-holte.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a441.22><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þorlákr byscop fór til Íslannz þat sama sumar sem hann vas <anchor id=a441.23>vígðr, ok tóko menn feginsamlega við hónom sem verðogt vas. <anchor id=a442.1><pb id=pb442 n=442><note place=margin>[73: 11.]</note>Hann helt eno sama lítelæte í byscopsdóme sínom sem hann <anchor id=a442.2>hafðe áðr haft; ok alla lét hann sína mann-koste í v&aolig;xt fara, en <anchor id=a442.3>&oelig;nga þverra meðan hann lifðe. Hann tók marga menn til læringar, <anchor id=a442.4>ok urðo þeir síðan góðer kenne-menn; ok í m&aolig;rgo eflðe <anchor id=a442.5>hann Cristnena á Íslande.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a442.6><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þá es Þorlákr byscop hafðe þriá vetr seteð at stóle í Scála-holte, <anchor id=a442.7>þá andaðesc Ioan byscop Ogmundar son at Hólom. En <anchor id=a442.8>síðan vas k&oelig;renn í staðenn Ketill Þórsteins son; ok fór hann útan <anchor id=a442.9>ok suðr til Danmerkr, ok vas þar vígðr til byscops x nóttom efter<note place=apparatus id=an442.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>efter]</ab> thus AM. 205; fyrer, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a442.10>Cyndil-messo ok kom til Íslannz et sama sumar efter.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=3.6><anchor id=a442.11><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þorlákr byscop rudde til þess á sínom d&aolig;gom, at þá vas <anchor id=a442.12>settr ok ritinn<note place=apparatus id=an442.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> ritaðr, Cd.</note> Cristinna-Laga-þ&aoacute;ttr, efter enna vitrozto manna <anchor id=a442.13>for-si&aoacute; á landeno, ok um<hi>b</hi>r&aoacute;ðom Ozorar erki-byscops; ok vóro <anchor id=a442.14>þeir báðer við stadder til forráða Þorlákr byscop ok Ketell byscop; <anchor id=a442.15>ok mart vas þat annat es þeir setto ok s&aolig;mðo á sínom d&aolig;gom til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a442.16>sið-bótar lannz-m&aolig;nnom.

<p n=3.7><anchor id=a442.17><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þorlákr byscop bauð barn-fóstr Halle Teitz syne í Hauka-dale; <anchor id=a442.18>ok fór þá Giz&oelig;rr, son Hallz, í Scála-holt; ok vas byscop við hann <anchor id=a442.19>svá ástúðlegr, sem hann være hans son; ok spáðe hann þat es <anchor id=a442.20>síðarr geck efter, at slíkr merkes-maðr munde trautt finnasc á<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a442.21>Íslande sem hann; ok varð á því raun síðan.

<p n=3.8><anchor id=a442.22><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þorláke byscope þiónaðe enn same prestr of-allt, meðan <anchor id=a442.23>hann lifðe, ok hann vas byscop, es Tiorve hét, ok vas B&aolig;ðvars&shy;son<note place=apparatus id=an442.3><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <hi>or</hi> Boðolfs son.</note>, <anchor id=a443.1><pb id=pb443 n=443><note place=margin>[74: 12.]</note>mikell dýrðar-maðr; ok hann hafðe áðr veret með Giz&oelig;re <anchor id=a443.2>byscope; ok mátte af slíko siá, ok &aolig;ðrom hans daglegom h&aoacute;ttom <anchor id=a443.3>prýðelegom, hverso iamn-lyndr hann vas at góðo í síno lífe.

<p n=3.9><anchor id=a443.4><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Hann s&oelig;ng hvern dag þriðiung af Psaltera seint ok skynsamlega; <anchor id=a443.5>en þess á miðli kende hann eðr ritaðe, eðr las yfer helgar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a443.6>ritningar, eðr læknaðe<note place=apparatus id=an443.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>læknaðe]</ab> <hi>or</hi> ræktaðe, 378.</note> r&aoacute;ð þeirra manna, es þess þurfto ok á hans <anchor id=a443.7>fund kvómo: aldrí vas hann iðjo-lauss. Orr vas hann við aumingja; <anchor id=a443.8>en kallaðr<note place=apparatus id=an443.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>kall.]</ab> balldr, Cd.</note> fé-fastr við alþýðo; ok sparðe þó alldrigi penninga <anchor id=a443.9>at nauðsynjom til allra þarfligra hluta.

<p n=3.10><anchor id=a443.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> En es Þorlák byscop skorte þriá vetr á fimm-t&oelig;gan at aldre;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a443.11>þá tók hann sótt efter Iól<note place=apparatus id=an443.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Iól]</ab> emend.; þat, Cd.</note>, ok lá í svefn-húse því es hann vas vanr <anchor id=a443.12>at sofa í ok lærðer menn hans. En (es) sótten tók at vaxa, þá <anchor id=a443.13>bað hann lesa yfer ser bóc þá es heiter <hi>Cura Pastoralis</hi>&mdash;þá bók <anchor id=a443.14>hefer g&oelig;rva Gregorius Páve, ok sagt frá greinelega hverso þeim <anchor id=a443.15>manne skal faret vesa at &aolig;llo, es stiórnar-maðr skal vesa annarra<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a443.16>manna. En þat þóttosc menn á finna, at hann hugðe síðan betr <anchor id=a443.17>til síns and-látz, an áðr<note place=apparatus id=an443.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>an áðr]</ab> áðr en, Cd.</note> bócen være lesen. Hann biósc síðan við <anchor id=a443.18>and-láte síno ....<note place=apparatus id=an443.5><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Here a sentence must be missing.</note> sem hann kaus sialfr; ok eige visse almúgenn <anchor id=a443.19>hvat framm fór í sóttenne allt til and-látz.

<p n=3.11><anchor id=a443.20><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Þorlákr vas vígðr til byscops á d&aolig;gom Gelasi páva, þá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a443.21>hafðe hann þriá vetr ens fiórða tigar. Hann andaðesc næsta dag <anchor id=a443.22>fyre Brigiðar-messo<note place=apparatus id=an443.6><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> Brygittar, Cd.</note>,&mdash;þá hafðe hann byscop vereð xv vetr,&mdash;ok <anchor id=a444.1><pb id=pb444 n=444><note place=margin>[75: 12.]</note>vas grafenn hiá enom fyrrom byscopom. Þá vóro konungar í <anchor id=a444.2>Norege, Eysteinn ok Sigurðr Iórsala-fare. Þá vas liðet frá Hingat-burð <anchor id=a444.3>C<hi>h</hi>risti <hi rend=sc>M. C.</hi> vetra ok xxvi vetr.

<p n=3.12><anchor id=a444.4><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Sá atburðr varð fyr norðan land enn<note place=apparatus id=an444.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>enn]</ab> þann, Cd.</note> sama dag es Þorlákr <anchor id=a444.5>byscop andaðesc, at á enne s&aolig;mo stundo fór leiðar sínnar prestr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a444.6>einn fróðr ok g&aolig;fogr, es Árne hét, sonr Biarnar Cearleifs<note place=apparatus id=an444.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Cearleifs]</ab> read Karlsefnis, <hi>or</hi> Kiarvals, Kiarlaks?</note> sonar; <anchor id=a444.7>hann heyrðe s&oelig;ng fagran upp í himenenn yfer sik, ok vas sungen <anchor id=a444.8><hi>Cantilena</hi> Lambertus byscops þesse:

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a444.9><hi lang=la>Sic animam claris coelorum reddidit astris;</hi>
</lg>

<p n=3.12.2><anchor id=a444.10>en þat vas vitað, þá (es) til vas prófat, at einge maðr hafðe þar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a444.11>í n&aoacute;nd veret. Þótte af því m&aolig;rgom m&aolig;nnom mikels vert um <anchor id=a444.12>þenna atburð; ok léto ser eige or minne falla.

<p n=3.13><anchor id=a444.13>Martees merkilegt ok g&oeacute;skosamlegt at segja frá Þorláke byscope <anchor id=a444.14>Rúnolfs syne.

<p><anchor id=a444.15><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Þau tíðende urðo í hans byscopsdóme:&mdash;at<note place=apparatus id=an444.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> á, Cd.</note> þá andaðesc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a444.16>Ioan byscop enn Helge at Hólom; ok Eysteinn konungr, ok <anchor id=a444.17>Sigurðr Iorsala-fare: Sæmundr prestr enn Fróðe andaðesc þat vár <anchor id=a444.18>et sama es Þorlákr byscop andaðesc áðr um vetrenn. Þá vas ok <anchor id=a444.19>víg Þórsteins Hallvarz sonar, ok Þóress Símunar sonar<note place=apparatus id=an444.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þór. Sím. s.]</ab> emend., see Ann. Reg. s. a. 1128; Þorarens Einars s., Cd.</note>: þá andaðesc <anchor id=a444.20>Bergþórr L&aolig;gs&aolig;go-maðr. Þá vas l&aolig;g-deila þeirra Hafliða Márs<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a444.21>sonar ok Þórgils Odda sonar: þá vas ok sætt þeirra.

<p n=3.14><anchor id=a444.22><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Marger h&aolig;fðingjar vóro Þorláke byscope ó-h&oeacute;ger fyr sakar <anchor id=a445.1><pb id=pb445 n=445><note place=margin>[76: 13.]</note>sínnar ó-hlýðne; en sumer í ó-ráðvende ok laga-brotom; en hann <anchor id=a445.2>hafðe allt í h&aolig;ndom sem bazt vóro efne á.

<p n=4.1><anchor id=a445.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Magnús</hi> vas sonr Einars, Magnús sonar, Þórsteins <anchor id=a445.4>sonar, Hallz sonar af Síðo; ok Þóríðar, Gils dóttor, <anchor id=a445.5>Hafrs sonar, Svertings sonar<note place=apparatus id=an445.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Svertings s.]</ab> om. Cd.</note>, Hafr-Biarnar sonar, Molda-Gnúps<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a445.6>sonar&mdash;Magnús vas upp f&oeacute;ddr með Einare f&aolig;ðor sínom, ok Odd&shy;nýjo <anchor id=a445.7>stiúp-móðor sínne, dóttor Magnúss prestz, Þórðar sonar, or <anchor id=a445.8>Reykja-holte. Þessom kv&aoacute;ðosc þau mest unnt<note place=apparatus id=an445.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> unnat, Cd.</note> hafa af &aolig;llom <anchor id=a445.9>sínom b&aolig;rnom. Magnús vas til b&oeacute;kr settr, ok vígðr &aolig;llom vígs&shy;lom <anchor id=a445.10>áðr hann vas prestr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a445.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Magnús vas vænn maðr at álite, ok heldr hárr maðr vexte, <anchor id=a445.12>fast-eygr ok vel limaðr; þýðr ok þeckelegr, ok allra manna <anchor id=a445.13>sk&aolig;roligaztr í &aolig;llo yfir-bragðe ok lát-g&oeacute;ðe. Hann vas liúfr ok <anchor id=a445.14>lítelátr við alla; stór-lyndr, ok stað-fastr í skape; fullræðasamr, <anchor id=a445.15>frænd-r&oeacute;kenn; marg-fróðr ok mál-sniallr. Hann reyndesc ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a445.16>vel brugðenn við hvárt-tveggja, búnað ok farar; ok vas of-allt <anchor id=a445.17>alla menn sættande, hvarge es<note place=apparatus id=an445.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hvarge es]</ab> hvar sem, Cd.</note> hann vas við m&aoacute;l manna staddr; <anchor id=a445.18>ok sparðe þess ecke, hvárke orð sín né auð&oeacute;fe.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a445.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En þá es Þorlákr byscop hafðe andasc áðr um vetrenn, þá <anchor id=a445.20>vas Magnús k&oelig;renn til byscops sumaret efter; ok þat sumar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a445.21>ætlaðe hann til útan-ferðar, ok varð aftr-reka í Bl&aolig;ndo-ós<note place=apparatus id=an445.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Blondo-óse, Cd.</note>, ok vas <anchor id=a445.22>þá í Scála-holte um vetrenn, ok fór til Noregs annat sumar efter. <anchor id=a446.1><pb id=pb446 n=446><note place=margin>[76: 13.]</note>Þat sumar fór hann útan es þeir Magnús Sigurðar son ok Haraldr <anchor id=a446.2>Gille b&aolig;rðosc á Fyri-leif, ok st&oelig;ck þá Haraldr undan suðr til Danmerkr. <anchor id=a446.3>Magnús byscops-emne fór til Danmerkr et sama haust ok <anchor id=a446.4>gaf giafar Harallde konunge; ok tóksc þá vin-fenge þeirra miket. <anchor id=a446.5>Magnús fór á fund Ozorar erki-byscops, ok tók hann við hónom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a446.6>virðolega, ok vígðe hann til byscops á Simonis messo-dag. Þann <anchor id=a446.7>vetr enn næsta var Magnús byscop í Sarps-borg, þar til es Haralldr <anchor id=a446.8>konungr varð ílendr<note place=apparatus id=an446.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Emend.; innlendr, Cd.</note>; þá fór hann til hans, ok tók konungr feginsamlega <anchor id=a446.9>við hónom, ok með enne mesto s&oeacute;mð ok virðingo; ok <anchor id=a446.10>vas með hónom þar til (es) hann fór út aftr til Íslannz, ok þá af<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a446.11>konunge virðolegar giafar; borð-ker, es vá átta merkr, ok vas <anchor id=a446.12>þar síðarr caleier or g&oelig;rr; ok morgar giafar aðrar; þvi at konungr <anchor id=a446.13>vas &aolig;rr ok stór-lyndr við vine sína.

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a446.14><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Magnús byscop kom til Íslannz um Alþinge, ok kom í Eyja-fi&aolig;rð, <anchor id=a446.15>ok reið til þings; ok kom þar þá (es) menn vóro at dómom,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a446.16>ok urðo eige á-sátter um eitt-hvert mál. En þá kom maðr at <anchor id=a446.17>dómenom ok sagðe, at nú riðe Magnús byscop á þinget. En <anchor id=a446.18>menn urðo svá fegner þeirre s&aolig;go, at þegar gengo aller menn <anchor id=a446.19>heim. En byscop geck síðan á hlaðet fyrer kirkjo, ok sagðe þá <anchor id=a446.20>&aolig;llom m&aolig;nnom þau tíðende en g&oelig;rzc h&aolig;fðo í Norege meðan<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a446.21>hann vas útan; ok þótte &aolig;llom m&aolig;nnom mikels um vert mál-snille <anchor id=a446.22>hans ok sk&aolig;rungskap.

<p n=4.5><anchor id=a446.23><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þá reyndesc ok brátt hverr ágætes-maðr hann vas í síno stór-lynde <anchor id=a447.1><pb id=pb447 n=447><note place=margin>[77: 14.]</note>ok for-si&aoacute;, bæðe fyrer sína h&aolig;nd ok annarra; af því at hann <anchor id=a447.2>sparðe alldrige fiár-hlut til meðan hann vas byscop, at sætta þá <anchor id=a447.3>sem áðr vóro sundr-þycker; ok lagðe þat iamnan af síno til es <anchor id=a447.4>þeirra vas í<note place=apparatus id=an447.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þeirra vas í]</ab> er þorf var þ. í mille, 378.</note> miðle; ok urðo af því engar deilðer með m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a447.5>meðan hann vas byscop. Hann hélt eno s&aolig;mo lítilæte við alþýðo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a447.6>sem áðr, þó (at) hann være byscop, ok vas hann af því vinsælle <anchor id=a447.7>an flester menn aðrer; ok hafðe þar marga stóra hlute til þess <anchor id=a447.8>g&oelig;rt.

<p n=4.6><anchor id=a447.9><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Magnús byscop lét miok auka kirkjo í Scála-holte, ok vígðe <anchor id=a447.10>síðan; ok vas kirkjo-dagr settr á Seljo-manna-messo; en áðr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a447.11>hafðe veret Cross-messa á vár, þá es Giz&oelig;rr byscop hafðe vígt. <anchor id=a447.12>Magnús byscop lét tialda kirkjo borða þeim es hann hafðe út haft, <anchor id=a447.13>ok vóro þat enar mesto g&oelig;rsemar. Hann hafðe ok út pell þat, <anchor id=a447.14>es h&aolig;kull sá es or g&oelig;rr<note place=apparatus id=an447.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>h&aolig;kull ... g&oelig;rr]</ab> emend.; haukr sa er á giorðr, Cd. (379); hauks nautr var er giorðr, 205. Skarm.] 379, AM. 110.</note> es Skarmendingr heiter.

<p n=4.7><anchor id=a447.15><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Hann eflde ok miok staðenn í m&aolig;rgom til-l&aolig;gom, þeim es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a447.16>lenge hafa mest g&oeacute;ðe at veret, bæðe staðnom ok svá þeim sem <anchor id=a447.17>hann hafa síðan varð-veitt<hi>an</hi>. Hann keypte til staðarens í Scála-holte <anchor id=a447.18>Ár-nes ok Sandár-tungo<note place=apparatus id=an447.3><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> -tungor, Cd.</note>, ok nær allar Vestmanna-eyjar áðr <anchor id=a447.19>an hann andaðesc, ok ætlaðe þar at setja munk-lífe; en hónom <anchor id=a447.20>endesc eige til þess líf.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=4.8><anchor id=a447.21><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En þá es Ketill byscop vas nú orðenn vel siau-t&oelig;gr, þá fór <anchor id=a447.22>hann til Alþingess, ok fól sik under b&oeacute;na-hald allra lærðra manna <anchor id=a448.1><pb id=pb448 n=448><note place=margin>[78: 15.]</note>á presta-stefno; ok þá bauð Magnús byscop hónom með ser heim <anchor id=a448.2>í Scála-holt til kirkjo-dags síns, ok brullaups þess, es þá<note place=apparatus id=an448.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá]</ab> read þar.</note> skylde <anchor id=a448.3>vesa. Sú veizla vas svá miok v&aolig;ndot, at slíks<note place=apparatus id=an448.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>slíks]</ab> slík, Cd.</note> ero sízt d&oeacute;me til <anchor id=a448.4>á Íslande: þar vas mikell mi&aolig;ðr blandenn, ok &aolig;ll atf&aolig;ng<note place=apparatus id=an448.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>atf&aolig;ng]</ab> ol á fong, Cd.</note> &aolig;nnor <anchor id=a448.5>sem b&aolig;zt mátte verða. En F&aolig;stodags aftan fóro byscopar báðer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a448.6>til laugar í Laugar-ás efter n&aoacute;ttorð<note place=apparatus id=an448.4><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> nattverð, Cd.</note>: en þar urðo þau tíðende, at <anchor id=a448.7>þar andaðesc Ketill byscop; ok þótto m&aolig;nnom þat mikel tíðende. <anchor id=a448.8>Mikell hryggleike vas þar á m&aolig;rgom m&aolig;nnom í því heim-boðe, <anchor id=a448.9>þar til es byscop vas grafenn ok um hann búet. En með fort&aolig;lom <anchor id=a448.10>Magnús byscops, ok dryck þeim enom ágæta es þar vas veittr, þá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a448.11>urðo menn skiótar af-hoga h&aolig;rmom sínom.

<p n=4.9><anchor id=a448.12><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> En efter þat vas k&oelig;renn<note place=apparatus id=an448.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>k&oelig;renn]</ab> vígðr, Cd.</note> til byscops at Hólom Bi&aolig;rn Gils <anchor id=a448.13>son; ok fór hann útan með bréfom Magnús byscops til Áskels <anchor id=a448.14>erki-byscops; ok vas Bi&aolig;rn vígðr til byscops næsta dag efter<note place=apparatus id=an448.6><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>efter]</ab> fyrer, AM. 110.</note> Cross-messo <anchor id=a448.15>á vár; ok fór út hingat et sama sumar, ok vas byscop at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a448.16>Hólom xv vetr.

<p n=4.10><anchor id=a448.17><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> En þá (es) fimtán vetr vóro liðner frá andláte Þorláks <anchor id=a448.18>byscops Rúnolfs sonar, en Magnús hafðe byscop veret xiiij vetr, þá <anchor id=a448.19>barsc<note place=apparatus id=an448.7><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>barsc]</ab> brast, Cd. and AM. 110. at] á, Cd. 110.</note> sú ó-hamingja at Íslande, at eige hefer &aolig;nnor þvílík veret <anchor id=a448.20>at mann-skaða:&mdash;þá es Magnús byscop hafðe faret yfer Vest&shy;fi&aolig;rðo,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a448.21>ok vas í Hitar-dale um Michaelis-messo. En enn næsta <anchor id=a448.22>dag efter messo-dagenn þá kom þar eldr í b&oeacute;enn um nátt-m&aoacute;l; <anchor id=a449.1><pb id=pb449 n=449><note place=margin>[79: 15.]</note>ok varð byscop eige fyrr varr við, an &dagger;<note place=apparatus id=an449.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> Somehow wrong.</note> hónom þótte eige óhætt út at <anchor id=a449.2>ganga: ok vas sem hann vilde eige bráðan<note place=apparatus id=an449.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bráðan]</ab> emend.; bæðe, Cd.</note> g&oelig;ra at flýja ógn <anchor id=a449.3>dauðans, es hann sá þá nálgasc; en hafa þess áðr beðet iamnan <anchor id=a449.4>Almátkan Goð, at hann skylde þat líf-lát spara hónom til handa, es <anchor id=a449.5>hónom þ&oeacute;tte ser í því sýn laugar-píning<note place=apparatus id=an449.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sýn laugar-píning]</ab> laung sin pining, Cd.</note>. Magnús byscop lét þar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a449.6>sítt líf í hús-bruna ok með hónom tveir menn ok lxx<note place=apparatus id=an449.4><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tveir menn ok lxx]</ab> Annals and Obituary, see Sturl. ii. 358, 395; ii and lxxx, Cd.</note>. Þar andaðesc <anchor id=a449.7>Tiorve prestr B&aolig;ðvars son, es ofallt hafðe hónom þiónat <anchor id=a449.8>í hans byscopsdóme: þar létosc siau prestar aðrer, ok aller <anchor id=a449.9>g&aolig;fger.

<p n=4.10.1><anchor id=a449.10>Lík byscops ok Tiorva voro nálega óbrunnen, ok vóro bæðe<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a449.11>f&oeacute;rð í Scála-holt. Ok þá vóro sender skynsamer menn í Fliótz-hlíð, <anchor id=a449.12>Páll prestr Solva son or Reykja-holte ok Goðmundr Coðrans <anchor id=a449.13>son, at segja þesse tíðende Halle Teitz syne, ok Eyjolfe Sæmundar <anchor id=a449.14>syne, ok &aolig;ðrom h&aolig;fðingjom es at veizlo vóro með hónom. Þeir <anchor id=a449.15>fóro þegar<note place=apparatus id=an449.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þegar]</ab> strax, Cd. (l)</note> í Scála-holt; en vestan kómo<note place=apparatus id=an449.6><ab type=textRef>kómo]</ab> kom, Cd.</note> með lík byscops ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a449.16>Tiorva, Goðmundr prestr Brannz son, ok Snorre Svertings son, <anchor id=a449.17>ok fleire virðoleger menn; ok kómo í Scála-holt á Dionysius-messo: <anchor id=a449.18>en Gereonis dag vóro líken niðr sett hiá grefte enna fyrre <anchor id=a449.19>byscopa. Ok hefer vætr<note place=apparatus id=an449.7><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vætr]</ab> emend.; verit, Cd.</note> meirr til ó-ynðis hagat an þá es menn <anchor id=a449.20>urðo svá nauð-skilja, at nálega varð hverr við sínn ást-vin at skilja<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a449.21>í Hitar-dal<hi>e</hi>.

<p n=4.11><anchor id=a449.22><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Magnús vas vígðr til byscops af Oz&oelig;re erki-byscope á d&aolig;gom <anchor id=a450.1><pb id=pb450 n=450><note place=margin>[80: 16, 17.]</note>Anacleti páva; á d&aolig;gom Harallz konungs Gilla ok Magnus Sigurðar <anchor id=a450.2>sonar Noregs kononga.&mdash;Þá vas hann vetre meirr an half-fert&oelig;gr. <anchor id=a450.3>En hann andaðesc í hús-bruna í Hitar-dale fimta dag <anchor id=a450.4>vico, einne nótt efter Michaelis-messo. Þá vas liðet frá Hingat-burðe <anchor id=a450.5>Christi <hi rend=sc>mc</hi> vetra xl ok einn vetr. Þá hafðe hann xiiij vetr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a450.6>vereð byscop.

<p n=4.12><anchor id=a450.7><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Meðan Magnús vas byscop, þá sviko b&oeacute;jar-menn Haralld <anchor id=a450.8>Gilla; ok þá féllo þeir Magnús konungr Sigurðar son ok Sigurðr <anchor id=a450.9>Slembe-diácn. Þá varð víg Þóriss Steinmóðs sonar; ok andlát <anchor id=a450.10>Oz&oelig;rar erki-byscops; ok Hrafns Ulfheðins<note place=apparatus id=an450.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Emend.; ok Ulfheðins, Cd.</note> sonar l&aolig;gs&aolig;go-mannz,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a450.11>ok Finnz log(s&aolig;go)mannz; ok Heinrecs Engla-konungs<note place=apparatus id=an450.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Englands k., Cd.</note>: ok mart <anchor id=a450.12>annat varð á hans d&aolig;gom þat es mikel tíðende vóro í.

<p n=5.1><anchor id=a450.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Efter andlát Magnús byscops, et næsta sumar, varð <anchor id=a450.14>at kiósa mann til byscops; ok fór útan Hallr Teitz <anchor id=a450.15>son ....<note place=apparatus id=an450.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> Here a whole clause must needs be left out&mdash;<hi>telling how he went to Rome and back again, and through what countries</hi>.</note> ok mælte all-staðar þeirra mále, sem hann være ofallt<note place=apparatus id=an450.4>ofallt] alls staðar, Cd.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a450.16>þar barn-f&oeacute;ddr sem þá kom hann. Hallr andaðesc í Trekt, þá <hi>es</hi> <anchor id=a450.17>þeir fóro aftr, ok vas eige vígðr til byscops. En þá es andlát hans <anchor id=a450.18>spurðesc til Íslannz, ok menn mundo þurfa at kiósa byscop, þá <anchor id=a450.19>vóro þat allra manna k&oelig;r sem ráða &aoacute;tto, með for-sió Biarnar byscops <anchor id=a450.20>á Hólom, at menn k&oelig;ro til byscops Norðlenzkan mann þann es<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a450.21><hi rend=sc>Kl&oeacute;ngr</hi> hét, ok vas Þórsteins son ok Halldóro Eyjolfs dóttor.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a450.22><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Kl&oeacute;ngr vas vænn maðr at álite, ok meðal-maðr at vexte, <anchor id=a451.1><pb id=pb451 n=451><note place=margin>[81: 17.]</note>kviklegr ok sk&aolig;rolegr, al-g&oelig;rr at ser, ok ritare góðr; ok enn meste <anchor id=a451.2>lærdóms-maðr. Hann vas mál-sniallr ok &oelig;r-uggr at vin-feste; ok <anchor id=a451.3>et mesta skáld. Hann hafðe veret með Katle byscope, ok hafðe <anchor id=a451.4>hann í m&aolig;rgo lage hans h&aoacute;tto góða.

<p n=5.3><anchor id=a451.5><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Kl&oeacute;ngr fór útan et sama sumar sem hann vas til byscops<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a451.6>k&oelig;renn<note place=apparatus id=an451.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> kosenn, Cd.</note> með bréfom Biarnar byscops á fund Áskels erki-byscops; <anchor id=a451.7>ok vígðe hann Kl&oeacute;ng til byscops xii nóttom efter Mário-messo <anchor id=a451.8>á vár; ok et sama sumar efter fór hann til Íslannz. Ok vas þá <anchor id=a451.9>komenn frá Róm sunnan ok allt útan or Bár, Giz&oelig;rr Hallz son, <anchor id=a451.10>ok fór út með hónom; ok &aoacute;tto þá menn at fagna tveim<hi>r</hi> senn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a451.11>enom b&aolig;ztom mann-g&oelig;rsemom á Íslande. Á tveim skipom kómo <anchor id=a451.12>út stór-viðer þeir es Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop let h&oelig;ggva í Norege til kirkjo <anchor id=a451.13>þeirrar, es hann lét g&oelig;ra í Scála-holte, es at &aolig;llo vas v&aolig;ndoð <anchor id=a451.14>framm yfer hvert hús annat, þeirra es á Íslande vóro g&oelig;r, bæðe at <anchor id=a451.15>viðom ok smíð<note place=apparatus id=an451.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>smíð]</ab> smíði, Cd.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=5.4><anchor id=a451.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En es byscop kom til stólsens í Scála-holte, þá varð hann <anchor id=a451.17>þegar svá vin-sæll við alþýðo, at iam-vel unno hónom þeir menn <anchor id=a451.18>hug-&aoacute;stom, es hann hafðe skamma stund at stóle seteð, es heldr <anchor id=a451.19>h&aolig;fðo við hónom horft í sínom huga. Es þat eige kynlegt, þó at <anchor id=a451.20>svá yrðe, þvi at hann vas stór-lyndr ok stór-gi&aolig;foll við vine sína,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a451.21>en &aolig;rr ok olmoso-góðr við fát&oeacute;k<hi>j</hi>a menn. Linr ok lítilátr vas <anchor id=a451.22>hann við alla; kátr vas hann ok keske-fimr, ok iamn-lyndr maðr <anchor id=a452.1><pb id=pb452 n=452><note place=margin>[81: 18.]</note>við vine sína ....<note place=apparatus id=an452.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> something is missing here.</note> svá at þar vas til allra or-lausna at siá es hann <anchor id=a452.2>vas, meðan<note place=apparatus id=an452.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>meðan]</ab> med (meþ), Cd.</note> hann vas at stólnom, hverskyns es við þurfte.

<p n=5.5><anchor id=a452.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hann lét taka til kirkjo-smíðar es hann hafðe einn vetr at <anchor id=a452.4>stólnom seteð. Svá sýndesc &aolig;ðrom m&aolig;nnom till&aolig;g vesa mikel til <anchor id=a452.5>kirkjo-g&oelig;rðar at hverjom misserom, bæðe í viðar-f&aolig;ngom ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a452.6>smiða-kaupom, ok mann-h&aolig;fnom þeim es þar fylgðo, at svá þótte <anchor id=a452.7>skyns&aolig;mom m&aolig;nnom, sem &aolig;ll lausa-fé þyrfte til at leggja, þau es <anchor id=a452.8>til staðarens l&aoacute;go í tiundom ok &aolig;ðrom till&aolig;gom. Búet þurfte <anchor id=a452.9>í annan stað svá mikella tillaga við at hverjom misserom, fyrer <anchor id=a452.10>sakar folks-fiolða ok gest-risne ok annarrar at-vinno, (at) svá þótte<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a452.11>sem þar m&oelig;nde þurfa til alla lausa aura þá es staðr átte. Í þriðjo <anchor id=a452.12>grein hafðe hann svá veizlor fiolmennar, ok stórar fé-giafar við <anchor id=a452.13>vine sína, es bæðe vóro marger ok g&aolig;fger, at þar þurfte nálega <anchor id=a452.14>&oelig;r-grynne<note place=apparatus id=an452.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&oelig;r-grynne]</ab> ogrynne, Cd.</note> fiár til at leggja. En Almáttegr Goð, es allt gótt gefr af <anchor id=a452.15>ser, lét &oelig;ngan þann hlut skorta<note place=apparatus id=an452.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hlut skorta]</ab> skort a, Cd.</note> es þurfte at hafa bæðe til kirkjo-gerðar<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a452.16>ok annarrar at-vinno, þeirrar es byscop vilde láta hafa <anchor id=a452.17>meðan hann lifðe. Þesser vóro h&aolig;foð-smiðar at kirkjonne í Scála-holte:&mdash;Árne, <anchor id=a452.18>es kallaðr vas h&aolig;foð-smiðr, ok Bi&aolig;rn enn Hage <anchor id=a452.19>Þórvallz son; Illoge Leifs son telgðe ok viðo. En þá (es) kirkjan <anchor id=a452.20>vas alg&oelig;r, orte Rúnolfr byscops son víso þessa:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a452.21>Hraust er h&aolig;ll sú er Criste hug-blíðom lét smíða
    <l><anchor id=a452.22>(góð es rót und r&aoacute;ðom) ríkr stiórnare (slíkom):
    <pb id=pb453 n=453><note place=margin>[82: 18.]</note><l><anchor id=a453.1>gifta varð<note place=apparatus id=an453.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>varð]</ab> var, Cd.</note> þat es g&oelig;rðe Goðs rann Igul-tanne;
    <l><anchor id=a453.2>Petr hefer eignasc ítra Arna smíð ok Biarnar.
</lg>

<p n=5.6><anchor id=a453.3><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop vas svá mikell mála-fylgis-maðr, ef hann<note place=apparatus id=an453.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ef hann ...]</ab> this whole clause is corrupt; ef hann var at sottr til ásiár at hann var bæðe h. mikell saker vizko ok m., etc.</note> vas <anchor id=a453.4>at sóttr til ásiá með þvi at hann vas bæðe h&aolig;fðinge mikell ok <anchor id=a453.5>saker vizko ok mál-snille: hónom vóro ok lannz-l&aolig;gen í kunnara<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a453.6>lage: af því h&aolig;fðo þeir h&aolig;fðingjar allan hlut mála, es byscop vas <anchor id=a453.7>í fylge með; vas ok enge sú g&oelig;rð um stór-m&aoacute;l, at eige være <anchor id=a453.8>Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop til hverrar tekenn. Þeir vóro ok hans viner traus&shy;tazter <anchor id=a453.9>es mest vóro virðer á Íslande, Ioan Loptz son ok Giz&oelig;rr <anchor id=a453.10>Hallz son. Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop átte ok giafa-víxl við ena st&oeacute;rsto<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a453.11>h&aolig;fðingja í &aolig;ðrom l&aolig;ndom þeim es í n&aoacute;nd vóro; ok af slíkom <anchor id=a453.12>hlutom varð hann vin-sæll, bæðe útan lannz ok innan.

<p n=5.7><anchor id=a453.13><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> En þá es kirkja vas g&oelig;r í Scála-holte, svá (at) byscope þótte <anchor id=a453.14>hon til vígslo fallen, þá g&oelig;rðe byscop veizlo mikla ok ágæta vinom <anchor id=a453.15>sínom; ok bauð þangat Birne byscope ok Nicholasi ábóta, ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a453.16>m&aolig;rgom h&aolig;fðingjom; ok vas þar enn meste fiolðe boðs-manna. <anchor id=a453.17>Þeir vígðo báðer kirkjo í Scála-holte, Kl&oeacute;ngr ok Bi&aolig;rn; annarr <anchor id=a453.18>útan, en annarr innan; ok helgaðo báðer Petro<note place=apparatus id=an453.3><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Petre, Cd.</note> postola, svá <anchor id=a453.19>sem áðr hafðe veret; en Nicholaus ábóte hafðe formæle.&mdash;Þat vas <anchor id=a453.20>á dege Viti píningar-váttz. En efter tíðer bauð Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a453.21>&aolig;llom þeim m&aolig;nnom es við kirkjo-vígslo h&aolig;fðo veret, at hafa þar <anchor id=a453.22>d&aolig;gorð<note place=apparatus id=an453.4><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> dagverð, Cd.</note>, þeim es ser þótte þat betr gegna; ok vas þat enn g&oelig;rt <anchor id=a454.1><pb id=pb454 n=454><note place=margin>[83: 18.]</note>meirr af stór-mennzko an fullre forsi&aoacute;; af því at á einn veg <anchor id=a454.2>reynesc<note place=apparatus id=an454.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>reynesc]</ab> emend.; reyndisk, Cd.</note> þat ofallt at eiga under m&aolig;rgom heimskom, es einn <anchor id=a454.3>vitr maðr má vel fyrer siá með stillingo; ok mátte þar ok þá mikit <anchor id=a454.4>at raun um þat komasc; fyrer þvi at eige h&aolig;fðo þar fære menn <anchor id=a454.5>d&aolig;gorð<note place=apparatus id=an454.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> dagverð, Cd.</note> an siau hundroð, ok urðo till&aolig;g með ó-h&oeacute;gendom áðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a454.6>létte. En veizla vas all-virðoleg, at &aolig;llom þeim m&aolig;nnom (þótte) <anchor id=a454.7>es þangat vas boðet; ok vóro aller virðinga-menn með stórom <anchor id=a454.8>gi&aolig;fom á braut leyster.

<p n=5.8><anchor id=a454.9><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop lét prýða<note place=apparatus id=an454.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Kl. bp. lét prýða]</ab> filled in by conj.; something is missing.</note>, þat mest hann mátte til fá, kirkjo þá <anchor id=a454.10>es hann let g&oelig;ra at Scála-holte, unz hon vas at &aolig;llo búen. Hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a454.11>lét g&oelig;ra goll-caleic, ok setja gim-steinom, ok gaf kirkjonne. Hann <anchor id=a454.12>lét ok ríta tíða-b&oeacute;cr miklo betre an áðr vóro. Sú vas &aolig;ll iðja <anchor id=a454.13>hans senn, at kenna prestlingom, ok ritaðe ok s&oelig;ng psaltara, ok <anchor id=a454.14>mælte þó allt es nauð bar til. Meinlátsamare<note place=apparatus id=an454.4><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Meinlátsamr, Cd.</note> vas hann í m&aolig;rgo <anchor id=a454.15>lage an aðrer byscopar h&aolig;fðo veret, í v&aolig;kom ok f&aolig;stom ok klæða-búnaðe.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a454.16>Hann geck opt ber-f&aoacute;ttr um nætr í snióvom ok frostom.

<p n=5.9><anchor id=a454.17><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Þá es Kl&oeacute;ngr hafðe tio vetr byscop veret, þá andaðesc Bi&aolig;rn <anchor id=a454.18>byscop at Hólom tveim nóttom efter Lucas-messo, þá es hann <anchor id=a454.19>hafðe fimmtán vetr byscop veret. En um sumaret efter vas k&oelig;renn <anchor id=a454.20>Brandr prestr S&aelig;mundar son; ok hafðe hann útan með ser bréf<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a454.21>Kl&oeacute;ngs byscops á fund Eysteins erki-byscops, ok vas hann vígðr <anchor id=a454.22>til byscops Mário-messo-dag enn síðara, ok vas í Bi&aolig;rgvin um <anchor id=a455.1><pb id=pb455 n=455><note place=margin>[84: 19.]</note>vetrenn ok svá Ioan Loptz son; en síðan fór byscop út um sumaret <anchor id=a455.2>efter, ok settesc á byscops-stólenn at<note place=apparatus id=an455.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> á, Cd.</note> Hólom sem hann vas <anchor id=a455.3>til vígðr.

<p n=5.10><anchor id=a455.4><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop helt allt til elle vegsemð sínne ok vin-sælðom, <anchor id=a455.5>svá at aller virðo hann mikels, þeir es mest vóro verðer.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a455.6>En es hann tók at eldasc, þá sótte at hónom van-heilsa mikel, ok <anchor id=a455.7>tóko<note place=apparatus id=an455.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tóko]</ab> tók, Cd.</note> í fyrsto f&oeacute;tr hans at opnasc af kulða ok meinlætom ok ó-h&oeacute;&shy;gendom <anchor id=a455.8>þeim es hann hafðe haft. En es hann tók at m&oeacute;ða bæðe <anchor id=a455.9>elle ok van-heilsa, þá sende hann útan bréf sín til Eysteins erki-byscops, <anchor id=a455.10>ok bað hann leyfiss, at hann mætte ná af hende at selja<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a455.11>land ok fiol-skylder<note place=apparatus id=an455.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Emend.; landz fiol-sk. (i. e. landz for land z), Cd.</note> byscopsdóms síns, ok at taka annan til byscops í <anchor id=a455.12>staðenn efter d&oeacute;mom Giz&oelig;rar byscops. En þau orð kómo aftr af <anchor id=a455.13>erki-byscope, at í hans leyfe skylde byscop kiósa ok senda útan; en <anchor id=a455.14>hann skylde halda upp tíða-g&oelig;rð ok kenningo meðan hann være <anchor id=a455.15>til f&oeacute;rr, þótt hann være eige f&oeacute;rr til yfir-ferðar.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=5.11><anchor id=a455.16><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop fór til Alþingess, ok sótte þá at h&aolig;fðingja, at <anchor id=a455.17>maðr være til byscops k&oelig;renn<note place=apparatus id=an455.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> kosenn, Cd.</note>; ok vas þat allra manna ráð, at <anchor id=a455.18>hann skylde kiósa þann sem hann vilde. En hann kaus Þorlák <anchor id=a455.19>Þórhallz son es þá vas ábóte í Þykkva-b&oeacute;. Ok vas þat mikel gæfa <anchor id=a455.20>Kl&oeacute;ngs byscops, es hann kaus þann mann efter sik, es nú es sann-heilagr;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a455.21>ok aller mego vita, at aldri hefer fyrr meirr ne einn maðr <anchor id=a455.22>at því reynzc á Íslande, nema enn heilage Þorlákr byscop, es þá <anchor id=a456.1><pb id=pb456 n=456><note place=margin>[85: 20.]</note>vas til byscops k&oelig;renn<note place=apparatus id=an456.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> kosenn, Cd.</note>. En þó hafðe Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop staðar-forr&aoacute;ð <anchor id=a456.2>þau missere; ok vas þó ó-h&oeacute;gt fyrer at ráða; þvi at þá <anchor id=a456.3>l&aoacute;go &oelig;ngar giafer til staðarens; en afvinna varð &oelig;ngo minne. <anchor id=a456.4>Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop selde sialfr af hende staðarens forr&aoacute;ð; ok feck þau <anchor id=a456.5>í hendr Þorláke byscope, ok þeim m&aolig;nnom es hann k&oelig;re til með<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a456.6>sér. En en síðosto missere es Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop lifðe, reis hann <anchor id=a456.7>nálega ecke or reckjo; ok biósc efter því við andláte síno, sem <anchor id=a456.8>hverr vitr maðr m&oelig;nde ser hellzt kiósa í l&aolig;ngom van-mætte.

<p n=5.12><anchor id=a456.9><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Kl&oeacute;ngr vas vígðr til byscops á d&aolig;gom Eugenii páva af <anchor id=a456.10>Áskatle<note place=apparatus id=an456.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Askele, Cd.</note> erki-byscope, ok á d&aolig;gom Eysteins ok Sigurðar Noregs<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a456.11>konunga. Þá hafðe hann siau<note place=apparatus id=an456.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>siau]</ab> ii, Cd. (= vii).</note> vetr ens fimta tigar, ok vas byscop <anchor id=a456.12>xxiiij vetr. Hann andaðesc þrimr<note place=apparatus id=an456.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þrimr]</ab> iij, Cd.</note> nóttom efter Mathias-messo&mdash;ok <anchor id=a456.13>berr svá ár-tíð hans; en fiórom ef hlaup-ár es eige<note place=apparatus id=an456.5><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eige]</ab> om. Cd. and AM. 110.</note>&mdash;þá vas <anchor id=a456.14>Þváttdagr í Imbro-dogom um Langa-f&aolig;sto. Þá vas liðet frá Hin&shy;gað-burð <anchor id=a456.15>Christi at almennilego ára-tale <hi rend=sc>mc</hi> lx ok ix &aoacute;r; ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a456.16>vas hann grafenn hiá enom fyrrom byscopom. En Þorlákr ábóte <anchor id=a456.17>stóð yfer hónom, bæðe hans grefte ok hans andláte; ok bar hónom <anchor id=a456.18>allz-kostar<note place=apparatus id=an456.6><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>allz-kostar]</ab> allz konar, Cd.</note> giftosamlega til, es slíkr maðr skylde yfer hónom standa <anchor id=a456.19>lífs ok &aolig;ndoðom, sem nú reynesc<note place=apparatus id=an456.7><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> reyndesk, Cd.</note> fyrer Goðe enn sæle Þorlákr <anchor id=a456.20>byscop.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=5.13><anchor id=a456.21><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> M&aolig;rg urðo stór tíðende meðan Kl&oeacute;ngr vas byscop, þó<hi>tt</hi> <anchor id=a456.22>her gete eige margra&mdash;þá varð frá-fall þeirra br&oeacute;ðra Gilla-sona <anchor id=a457.1><pb id=pb457 n=457><note place=margin>[85: 21.]</note>Noregs konunga, Sigurðar fyrst, en þá Eysteins, en síðast Inga: <anchor id=a457.2>ok andlát Ióans erki-byscops; ok fall Hákonar Herðe-breiðs; ok <anchor id=a457.3>andlát Biarnar byscops á Hólom. Á d&aolig;gom Kl&oeacute;ngs byscops vas <anchor id=a457.4>píndr enn heilage Thomas erki-byscop á<note place=apparatus id=an457.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á]</ab> i, Cd.</note> Englande. Ok á hans <anchor id=a457.5>d&aolig;gom kom annat sinn upp eldr í Heklo-felle; þá vas ok iarð-skialfte<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a457.6>sá, es mann-skaðe varð af. Þesser menn &aolig;ndoðosc <anchor id=a457.7>Íslenzker meðan Kl&oeacute;ngr vas byscop&mdash;Ioan Sigmundar son<note place=apparatus id=an457.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Sigurðs son, Cd.</note>, ok <anchor id=a457.8>Hreinn ábáte<note place=apparatus id=an457.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ábáte]</ab> á báre, Cd.</note>, Póll Þórðar son, ok Goðmundr Ketils son; Biarn-heðinn <anchor id=a457.9>prestr Sigurðar son, ok Beiner bróðer hans. Víg Helga <anchor id=a457.10>Skafta sonar; ok Nicholas Sigurðar son vas þá felldr í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a457.11>Þrónd&shy;heime.

<p n=5.14><anchor id=a457.12><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Nú má oss sýnasc sem eige hafe slíkr sk&aolig;rungr veret fýr <anchor id=a457.13>margra hluta sakar á Íslande sem Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop vas; viljom ver <anchor id=a457.14>þat ok ætla, at hans rausn mone uppe meðan Ísland es bygt.


<p lang=en-UK>[<hi>Epilogue.</hi>]

<p><anchor id=a457.15>Nú es komet at frá-s&aolig;go þeirre sem segja skal frá enom sæla<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a457.16>Þorláke byscope; ok es þesse saga her samið<note place=apparatus id=an457.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> samin, Cd.</note> til skemtanar <anchor id=a457.17>góðom m&aolig;nnom; ok til fróðleiks<note place=apparatus id=an457.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fróðleiks]</ab> emend.; frásaguar, Cd.</note>, sem aðrar þær es her &apos;ro fyrr ritnar<note place=apparatus id=an457.6>ritnar] ritaðar, Cd.</note>. <anchor id=a457.18>En svá vel sem frá-s&aolig;gn ferr frá hverjom þeirra, þá ero þó enge <anchor id=a457.19>d&oeacute;me fegre í alla staðe an frá þessom enom dýrlega Goðs vin es <anchor id=a457.20>at segja, Þorláke byscope; es at rétto má segjasc geisle eðr gim-steinn<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a457.21>heilagra, bæðe á þesso lande, ok svá annars-staðar um <anchor id=a458.1><pb id=pb458 n=458><note place=margin>[89: 1.]</note>heimenn. Hann má at s&aolig;nno kallasc postole Íslannz, svá sem <anchor id=a458.2>enn heilage Patrekr kallaðesc postole Írlannz; þvi at þeir fr&aolig;mðo <anchor id=a458.3>verk postola sialfra í sínom kenningom ok þolin-m&oeacute;ðe, bæðe við <anchor id=a458.4>ó-hlýðna menn ok rangláta.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<!-- BEGIN OF TRANSLATED TEXT OF HER BYRJAR HUNGRVOCO -->


<pb id=pb425a n=425>
<div2 lang=en-UK id=en.hungrvoco rend="display(none)">
<head><hi>Here beginneth Hunger-waker.</hi></head>

<p n=0.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> This little book I call <hi rend=sc>Hunger-waker</hi> inasmuch as it appears to many uninformed men, wise though they be, that have gone through it, that they would wish to know much more thoroughly the rise and the life of those notable men of whom little is told forth in this scroll, though I have cast together into my book well-nigh all that I have fast in my memory.

<p n=0.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> I have put together this little book in order that there might not altogether fall out of my memory what I heard that man of knowledge, Gizor Hallsson, say on the matter thereof, and what certain other notable men have set forth in narrative.

<p>This also in the second place hath led me to write this, that it might draw young men on to make themselves acquainted with our speech [letters] and to read what is written in the northern tongue, Law or Histories or Biographies.

<p n=0.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> I have rather set this matter down in a scroll, than such other kind of knowledge as hath been already set in scrolls, because methinks that it is for my children or other young men in the highest degree right to know, first and foremost, how and in what way Christendom hath grown to strength here, and how the bishops&apos; sees were set in Iceland; and, secondly, to know what notable men the bishops that have been here have been, of whom I am purposed to speak.

<p n=0.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Moreover this reason also enforceth me to write how the see hath <pb id=pb426a n=426>grown and waxed strong in Scal-holt, and of the conversation of those men that have had it in their keeping&mdash;to wit, that I have by the grace of God gotten from them all my furtherance in this world.

<p n=0.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> And I am aware that to wise men this little book will seem most like unto the stuff out of which a horn-spoon is wrought, for that is most ungainly while it is yet a-making, but very fair when it is carved.

<p n=0.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> But they that seek amusement from this little book may profitably use it for their own entertainment and that of such others as are willing cautiously to hearken thereto, rather than jeopard themselves in other pastimes to while away dull hours. For many a man hath proved this, that if he will seek him short-lived pleasure there must needs follow thereafter long penance.

<p n=0.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Methinks it is good that a man shall pick out of this goodly matter that is here written, whatsoever he liketh best and whatsoever yieldeth him pleasure, and let him lay up in his mind that which falleth in with his mind, but drop that which doth not fall in with his fashion of thought.

<p n=0.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> And methinks that for such it is better that they should mend that which they think to be told poorly here, and which they know somewhat more thoroughly, rather than that they should cry it down or turn it into mockery, and yet be neither willing nor able to mend it for themselves.

<p n=0.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> And for this cause also I have likened this to a horn-spoon, because methinks there is much good stuff therein, but I know that there is <pb id=pb427a n=427>much need that it be beautified <hi>or</hi> fair wrought, and I shall as long as I am able busy myself to the mending thereof.

<p n=0.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> I also am the more bound to do this, because it is my fault and my lack of care if, in the matter that is here written, there be anything which shall turn out to be wrong, and not the fault of those men of whom I have said that I have drawn my knowledge thereof.

<p n=0.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> And inasmuch as there is an old saw, that <hi>it is the house that holds the man</hi>, I will speak first of how the house was settled at Scal-holt, and afterwards of them that have been the keepers of the see.

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Cetil-beorn the Old</hi> dwelt at Moss-fell, and had many children. Tait was the name of a son of Cetil-beorn. He was so fortunate that he first set up the homestead that is called Scal-holt, which is now the noblest house in all Iceland. This was his second piece of good fortune, that he had for a son Gizor the White, who came with Christendom to Iceland, and dwelt in Scal-holt after his father Tait. Gizor the White had three wives. First he had to wife Hall-dora, daughter of Hrod-wolf o&apos; Goatland; their daughter was Wil-borg, whom Sholto Scegge&apos;s son had to wife. Then Gizor had to wife a woman from the islands [Western Islands], whose name was Thor-dis, and their son was Cetil, who had to wife Thor-katla, Skapte&apos;s daughter. Then Gizor had to wife Thor-dis the daughter of Thor-ord the gode o&apos; Hiall in Aulfus, and they had many children.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Their son was <hi rend=sc>Is-laf</hi>. Gizor took him abroad, and put him as a disciple with an abbess in a town that is called Her-forth. <pb id=pb428a n=428>When Is-laf came back to Iceland he was a priest and well learned. He married and took to wife Dolla, the daughter of Thor-wald o&apos; Ridge. They got three sons. Gizor was the name of one, who afterwards was bishop; the second was named Tait, who dwelt in Hawk-dale; the third was named Thor-wald, who dwelt at Hrawn-garth, a great chief. Gizor the White had the first church set up in Scal-holt, and was buried there at that church. But Is-laf dwelt at Scal-holt after his father.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Is-laf was a fair man to look on, and well beloved of all men, and all his life upright and honest, generous and benevolent, but never a wealthy man. But when Is-laf was fifty years old (and Iceland had not been christened any longer than that), then he was bidden to go abroad, and chosen as bishop by the whole commonweal in Iceland. Then he went abroad and southward to Saxland, and went to see the emperor, Henry Conradsson, and gave him a white bear that had come from Greenland, and this beast was the greatest treasure, and the emperor gave Is-laf his writ with his seal to go over all his dominions. Then he went to see pope Leo. And the pope sent his writ to Adalbert, archbishop of Bremen, that he should give Is-laf the consecration of a bishop on Whit-Sunday, and the pope said that he was in hope that by God&apos;s grace this bishopric should be a long-enduring office if the first bishop were consecrated to Iceland on the day in which God blessed the whole world with the gift of the Holy Ghost. And Is-laf was consecrated bishop on that day, according to the pope&apos;s command, by Adalbertus, archbishop in <pb id=pb429a n=429>Bremen, fourteen nights before Columba&apos;s mass-day [26th May, 1056]. And the archbishop gave him all the insignia that he needed to have with the office of bishop, according as the pope and the emperor had sent him word.

<p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> After this bishop Is-laf came the same summer to Iceland, and set up his bishop&apos;s see at Scal-holt. He had much trouble in many ways in his bishopric because of the disobedience of men. And it may be somewhat of a token of what need he hath been in by reason of the lack of faith, and the disobedience, and evil conversation of those under him, that the Law-speaker had to wife mother and daughter. And in those days some men lay at sea on wicking cruises and in war ships, and many betook themselves to many other abominations which would now be thought shocking if men were to commit them.

<p n=1.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> In the days of bishop Is-laf there came hither bishops from other lands and gave easier commands than bishop Is-laf, wherefore they found favour with evil men, until archbishop Adalbert sent his writ out to Iceland and forbade men to receive any service at their hands, and saying that some of them were excommunicated, and that all had come without his leave.

<p n=1.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> In the days of bishop Is-laf there came to Iceland a bishop whose name was Col, and he died here. He was buried at Scal-holt. Now this church was the first here in this country that was honoured by the burial of a man of rank, the church which by right may be called the ghostly mother of all other consecrated houses in Iceland.

<p n=1.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Bishop Is-laf kept all through a straitened household as regards <pb id=pb430a n=430>money. The revenue was little, but the calls upon it were many, and thereby the household was strained.

<p n=1.7.1><ab type=parNum>7. b.</ab> Many men sent him their sons (see Libellus <hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1).

<p n=1.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> But when Is-laf had been bishop four-and-twenty winters he was taken ill at the All-moot, at mass, so quickly and suddenly that he was forced to put off his mass-vestments at once, and then priest Guth-thorm, Fin-wolf&apos;s son of Bath-dale, by the order of the bishop put on the mass-vestments and went on with the mass where the bishop left off, and ended the mass. Then the bishop was brought home to Scal-holt, and a room prepared for him in the church. And there men were seeking him for counsel, both as to the choice of a bishop and as to other things which they thought it was needful to speak about. And he gave them this counsel, that they should ask Guth-thorm the priest to go abroad [to be hallowed bishop], saying that he was the best fitted of all them that were then in the country; nevertheless he said that they would be long getting a bishop in Iceland, unless they promised to behave in more seemly wise to him who should succeed him than they had done to himself.

<p n=1.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> In the latter part of the life of bishop Is-laf there appeared many things about him which very clearly showed forth his goodness before the face of those men who knew how to look at them, insomuch that many mad folk were brought to his hand that went away whole after they had seen him. He blessed drink that darnel had got into, and it was good to drink afterwards; and many another such thing happened <pb id=pb431a n=431>about him, although I do not now tell over one by one all things that he did, and which seemed to the wisest men to show that he must have the greatest power <hi>in working miracle</hi>s.

<p n=1.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Is-laf was consecrated bishop when he was fifty years old. Harold Sigurdsson was then king over Norway. Bishop Is-laf died on the Lord&apos;s-day in the church at Scal-holt at midday, [three] nights before the Sel-men&apos;s-mass [5th July]. He had then been bishop four-and-twenty winters, and he was buried by the tomb of bishop Col. There was then passed from the birth of Christ 1073 years [July 5, 1080].

<p n=1.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> It is told that bishops came out hither to Iceland in the days of bishop Is-laf, but Frederick was the only one that came out before of whom stories were made. But these are those who have come here of whom men have taken most account:&mdash;

<p>Bishop John the Irishman; and some men hold for true that he afterwards went to Wendland and that there he turned many to God, and at last he was taken and flogged, and both his hands and feet cut off, and last of all his head, and in such torment he departed to God.

<p>The third bishop that came to Iceland was Beorn-hard Wilradsson, who was called the Book-wise, and such men say that he was from England, and that he had followed St. Olaf, and had afterwards by his counsel journeyed to Iceland.

<p>The fourth bishop was Rud-olf, whom some say was called Wolf, and he was by kin of Ruda [Rouen] in England [Normandy]. He was nineteen winters in Iceland, and dwelt at By in Borg-frith.

<pb id=pb432a n=432><p>Fifth came to Iceland bishop Henry, and he was two winters in Iceland.

<p>The sixth was bishop Bearn-hard the Saxlander, and he was with king Magnus the Good, the son of Olaf. Afterwards he journeyed to Iceland, and was here twenty winters. He had two households in Water-dale&mdash;Gill-water and Stan-stead. He hallowed many things which bear many marks thereof, church and bells, causeways and brooks, fords and rivers, rocks and small hills, and all those things are held to have shown forth true proofs of his goodness. Bearn-hard was in Iceland while king Harold Sigurdsson was in Norway, inasmuch as they were not at one. Afterwards he went out of the country, and took service with king Olaf the Peaceful, the son of Harold, and afterwards he went to Rome at the prayer of the king, and made peace for the dead. And when he came back the king made him bishop of Selia, and afterwards he went to Beorg-win [Bergen], and there he died, and it is said by all that he was a man of the greatest note.

<p n=1.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> In the days of bishop Is-laf there were many and great tidings. There was in Norway the fall of king St. Olaf; then came about also the death of king Magnus the Good, the son of king Olaf, and he died in Denmark, but his body was brought north into Thrond-ham to Nith&apos;s-mouth [Nidaros]. Both these died ere Is-laf was bishop; but after he was bishop king Harold Sigurdsson fell in England, and a little later Harold Godwinesson. There died king Magnus, son of Harold Sigurdsson, and Swain Wolfsson, king of the Danes ..... [in Iceland <pb id=pb433a n=433>there died .....], and Thor-kell Eywolfsson, Gelle Baul-werksson, Thor-stan Cogsson, Snorre the gode, and men of great account.



<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Gizor</hi>, the son of bishop Is-laf, was born in Scal-holt, but he was taught in Saxland [Saxony], and was hallowed priest straightway in his youth. But when he came out to Iceland he married and took to wife Stan-wen Thor-grim&apos;s daughter, whom Thore Brorde&apos;s son had to wife before, and they kept house first at Temple in Weapon-frith.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Gizor was a big man of stature and portly, bright-eyed and somewhat open-eyed, of noble presence, and the most kindly of men; strong of body, and a wise man. Gizor was finished in all those qualities which a man ought to possess. He was a great traveller the early part of his life as long as Is-laf was alive, and was always held worthy wherever he went, and he served men of rank while he was abroad. King Harold Sigurdsson was then king of Norway, and he spoke these words of Gizor, saying that he could see that he was very well suited to bear any rank he might get. He and his wife went to Rome before they came back to Iceland.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Gizor was not in the country when his father died, but he came out here the second summer before the All-moot to Rang-water-mouth, and was on board some nights, for he would not ride to the Moot as long as none had been chosen bishop at the Moot. The chiefs asked Guth-thorm the priest to go abroad [to be hallowed bishop], according <pb id=pb434a n=434>as they thought bishop Is-laf had specially directed, and at last he consented, if there were thought to be no better choice. But when Gizor heard that priest Guth-thorm was appointed to go abroad, then he went to the Moot. But when Gizor came to the Moot, then priest Guth-thorm walked forth to the parvis before the church and declared to the whole commonalty that there was no question of his going out [for consecration] now that they could choose Gizor. Then all the commonalty turned to Gizor and prayed him to go abroad, but he excused himself in many ways; nevertheless it came about at the last that he consented to undertake this difficult charge, and all the chiefs promised to pay obedience to all God&apos;s ordinances [the canon law] that he should order if he were hallowed bishop.

<p n=2.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Then he went abroad that same summer. But when he came to Saxland archbishop Liemarus had been deprived of all his power. Therefore he went to see pope Gregory [VII], and told him all that happened before and during his journey, and also the difficulties by which he was in many ways beset. But the pope sent Gizor to Hard-wig, archbishop of Magdeburg in Saxland, and bade him to give him the consecration of a bishop, and he received him with great honour and worshipfully, and hallowed him bishop four nights before the latter Mary-mass <hi>or</hi> Lady-day [Sept. 4, 1082]. He was then forty years of age, and the archbishop gave him all that he lacked for his present needs.

<p n=2.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> After this bishop Gizor came out to Iceland, and the whole commonalty received him gladly. He received such rank and honour <pb id=pb435a n=435>immediately at the outset of his bishopdom that every man would sit or stand as he bade, young or old, rich or poor, women or men, and it is true to say that he was both king and bishop over the land as long as he lived.

<p n=2.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> He had not all the land at Scal-holt for his farm at first for some while, because his mother Dalla wished to keep up a household on her share of it as long as she lived. But when she was dead and the bishop came into the whole land, then he bestowed it all upon the church that is in Scal-holt, which he himself had had built thirty [fathoms] long and hallowed to Peter the Apostle. And with much other wealth did Gizor endow this church both in lands and money, and he said moreover that there should always be a bishop&apos;s see while Iceland was inhabited and Christendom lasted. Bishop Gizor gave to the church in Scal-holt a white purple-hackle [mass-cope], which has long been the best there, and many other treasures.

<p n=2.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> These men were of the same time as bishop Gizor: Sæ-mund the priest o&apos; Orde, who was the best both of wise men and clerks; secondly, Marcus Scegge&apos;s son, the law-speaker, who was the greatest sage and poet. They took counsel together and brought this counsel before the chiefs, that it should be made law that men should give tithes of their stock every season, and of all the legal increase of their stock, as was the custom in other lands where Christian men dwell. And from their consultation and wise persuasive speeches the end of the <pb id=pb436a n=436>matter was that men took upon themselves the payment of tithe, and the tithe was to be dealt into four shares&mdash;one for the bishop, another for the church, a third share the clerks should have, and a fourth share the poor. And there hath been no such foundation in Scal-holt for wealth and profit as this tithe-tax, which was laid on by reason of the popularity and power of bishop Gizor. [See Libellus <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 3.]

<p n=2.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Stan-wen Thor-grim&apos;s daughter kept the household in Scal-holt indoors while bishop Gizor ruled the see, and Dalla while bishop Is-laf lived.

<p n=2.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> But when bishop Gizor had been established in his see for twenty winters or near that time, the North-land-men made petition to him that they might have a bishop of their own, and set up a second bishop&apos;s see in the North-land-men&apos;s Quarter, and that he should endow the same with the fourth of the whole revenues of his diocese, and that there should be two bishop sees in the land; and they said that they hoped that this once done there would be every hope they would seldom or never be bishopless in the land if there were two bishop sees there. And this petition bishop Gizor granted for God&apos;s sake to the North-land-men, and afterwards there was chosen to bishop, by God and good men, priest John Og-mund&apos;s son. And he went abroad with a writ of bishop Gizor&apos;s, and afterwards went to see pope Paschalis, and he was hallowed bishop by Auzur, archbishop of Lund in Sconey [April 29], two nights before Philip-and-James-mass. <pb id=pb437a n=437>Then John went to Iceland and set up his bishop&apos;s see at Holar in Sholto-dale in Shaw-frith.

<p n=2.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> [See Libellus <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 6.]

<p n=2.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> But when bishop Gizor was half-eighty [75] years old, so great heaviness came upon him that he did not rise from his bed and could not go to the Moot. Then he sent word to his friends and all the chiefs at the All-moot that men should pray priest Thor-lac the son of Run-olf to go abroad [to be hallowed bishop]. But he excused himself both by reason of his youth and for many other causes. Nevertheless the end of the matter was that he consented to undertake the burden if it were the bishop&apos;s will. Then bishop Gizor had him equipped for his journey, and gave him his writ to archbishop Auzur.

<p n=2.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> But his sickness increased upon bishop Gizor, and became hard, strong and painful, and there came great sores upon his flesh down to the bone, and there was great pain from his disease. But when the sickness began to overcome him, and men thought they could hear his bones rattle when he was moved, then goodwife Stan-wen went to his bed and asked him how low should a man&apos;s strength become when there should be vows made for him? But the bishop answered, &lsquo;For this only should ye make vows to God, that my pain should go on ever increasing, if a vow be made at all, as long as I am able to bear it; for it is not permitted that a man should have himself prayed out <pb id=pb438a n=438>of God&apos;s battle; and now my life must be well-nigh at its end, and ever up to now things have gone sun-ward [happily] with me.&rsquo; He was also asked then where he would have himself buried, but he answered with compunction and great lowliness, &lsquo;By no means bury me near my father, for I am not worthy to rest near him.&rsquo; Then he set all things in order according as he would have them to be before he died.

<p n=2.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> His sons were all dead before him, save Bead-were only. Groa, his daughter, lived after him; she was given in marriage to Cetil Thor-stan&apos;s son.

<p n=2.14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Gizor was hallowed bishop when he was forty years old, when Olaf the Peaceful was king in Norway, the son of Harold Sigurdsson. Bishop Gizor died the third day of the week, twelve nights before Columba-mass [May 28]. He had then been bishop thirty-six winters. He was buried by his father. There were then passed from the birth of Christ eleven hundred and eleven winters [1118].

<p n=2.15><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> The death of bishop Gizor touched many men so deeply that it never went out of their mind as long as they lived. And all men were agreed on this, that they believed they would never get his peer, and it was the verdict of all wise men that he hath been by God&apos;s grace and by his own good parts the noblest man <hi>that hath ever been</hi> in Iceland, whether of clerks or laymen.

<p n=2.16><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> [See Libellus <hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 12.]

<pb id=pb439a n=439><p n=2.17><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> [See Mantissa <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1, p. 267.]

<p n=2.18><ab type=parNum>18.</ab> And it was the belief of the wisest men that it looked as if Iceland was drooping after the death of bishop Gizor, as the realm of the city of Rome did after the fall of pope Gregory [<hi>the Great</hi>], and the loss of bishop Gizor betokened [<hi>or</hi> pointed to the quarter of] all kind of distress in Iceland from bad seasons, both in wrecking of ships and loss of life and damage to stock that accompanied it, and after that in civil war and breaking of the laws, and upon the top of that such a mortality over all the land that there hath never been such since the land was dwelt in. Two winters after the loss of bishop Gizor, Haf-lide Mar&apos;s son was wounded at the All-moot, and the case was not judged that summer.

<p n=2.19><ab type=parNum>19.</ab> Bead-were alone of the sons of bishop Gizor was alive when he died, but there died before him his other sons, Tait, As-geir, Thord, and John. Groa lived also long after, and became a nun, and died at Scal-holt in the days of bishop Clong.

<p n=2.20><ab type=parNum>20.</ab> In the bishopdom of bishop Gizor there were many great tidings:&mdash;The loss of the holy king Cnut at Fion [Fünen] and of Benedict his brother, of the two Williams kings of England, the death of king Olaf <pb id=pb440a n=440>the Peaceful, and Hacon Magnusson in Norway, the fall of Magnus Bare-leg west in Ireland in Ulaztir [Ulster], the translation of Saint Nicholas bishop of Bari, the death of king Olaf Magnusson in Norway, the passion of Saint Magnus the earl, the death of the law-speakers Marcus [and] Ulf-hedin, and of Tait Is-laf&apos;s son, and the other sons of bishop Is-laf, the coming up of fire [eruption] in Hecla, and many other great tidings, though they be not written down here.



<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Thor-lac</hi>, the son of Run-olf, the son of Thor-lac, the son of Thor-arin, the son of Thor-kel Coll o&apos; Scots, and the son of Hall-frid, daughter of Snorre, the son of Carls-efne, was brought up with his father in his childhood, but he was schooled at Hawk-dale. He was early of good understanding and manners, and in favour with all good men. He was greatly given to books even in his youth, and quick of understanding, and disposed to clerkship. He was gentle and lowly, and no meddler, of wholesome counsel, and whole-hearted towards all men that were with him, meek-mannered and merciful with all that needed it, fond of his kindred, and full of foresight in all matters, both those which concerned himself and others. Thor-lac was two winters of the fourth ten [32] when he was chosen bishop, and therein it may be noted what a man he was, since he chose him for the greatest of charges who was the wisest and noblest and best acquainted with him, that is bishop Gizor.

<pb id=pb441a n=441><p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Thor-lac was a man of middle height, long of face, and light-brown of hair, nice looking, but not called a fair man by the generality of folk, nor of great presence according to most men&apos;s reckoning. And when he came abroad it was thought that there could be no great choice of men in the country, for he seemed to them not the man to be presented to such an office. But he answered himself that it was not that, and he said that the real reason was that he had rather concealed his faults before man than before God; and by this answer men thought they could perceive that he was well suited to such an office. And when he came to see archbishop Auzur he soon saw what manner of man Thor-lac was, and received him honourably and worshipfully, but yet he made some difficulty about his consecration, and said that he could not put head upon head; nevertheless at the message of bishop Gizor he promised him consecration, but he would not consecrate him to the see wherein there was already another bishop, and he bade him choose him another see, that he might be consecrated, but yet he gave him leave that he should be in Scal-holt if bishop Gizor gave him leave if he were alive when bishop Thor-lac came back.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Thor-lac was hallowed bishop three nights before Philip-and-James-mass [April 28], and he was hallowed to the see of Reek-holt in Borg-frith. He was hallowed in Denmark thirty days before bishop Gizor died at Scal-holt.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac went to Iceland the same summer that he was hallowed, and men received him gladly as was his due. He kept the <pb id=pb442a n=442>same lowliness in his bishopdom as he had had before, and he let all his qualities wax and none wane as long as he lived. He took many men as his disciples <hi>or</hi> scholars, and they afterwards became good clerks, and in many ways he strengthened Christendom in Iceland.

<p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> When bishop Thor-lac had sat three winters in the see at Scal-holt, there died bishop John Agmund&apos;s son at Holar [1121], but afterwards there was chosen in his place Cetil Thor-stan&apos;s son, and he went abroad southward to Denmark, and was hallowed bishop there ten nights after Candle-mass [Feb. 12, 1122], and came out to Iceland the same summer afterwards.

<p n=3.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac brought things so far in his days that the Christian Law Section was established, and written according to the provision of the wisest men in the country and by the advice of archbishop Auzur, and they were both stood by to the furtherance thereof, bishop Thor-lac and bishop Cetil. And many another thing was there which they established and put together, <hi>or</hi> ordained in their days for the reform of the people of this country.

<p n=3.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac offered Hall Tait&apos;s son of Hawk-dale to foster one of his sons, and therefore Gizor Hall&apos;s son came to Scal-holt, and the bishop was so loving to him as he was to his own sons, and foretold what afterwards came to pass, that there should scarcely be found such a man of note in Iceland as he would be, and this was proved afterwards.

<p n=3.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> The same priest served Thor-lac always as long as he lived and was bishop, whose name was Tiorve the son of Bead-were, a man of great <pb id=pb443a n=443>goodness, and who had been before with bishop Gizor, and by this and by his other daily noble manners how even-minded he was to good in his life.

<p n=3.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> He used to sing every day a third part of the psalms slowly and clearly, and between times he used to teach or write or read over the holy scriptures, or give healing counsel to those that needed it and came to him. He was never idle. He was bountiful to the helpless, but was called close-fisted by the commonalty, though he never spared money in needful cases for anything that required it.

<p n=3.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> But when bishop Thor-lac was three years short of fifty years of age [47], he took an illness after Yule, and lay in the dormitory where he and his clerks were wont to sleep. And when this illness began to increase he bade them read to him the book that is called Cura Pastoralis, which Gregory the pope wrote, and wherein is told minutely how he shall order his way withal who shall be a governor of other men. And men thought they could see that he was in better heart respecting his own death after than he had been before the book was read to him. Then he made ready against his death [<hi>only such men having entrance to his sick chamber</hi>] as he himself chose, but the common people did not know at all how his sickness went on till his death.

<p n=3.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Thor-lac was hallowed bishop in the days of pope Gelasius. He was then three winters of the fourth ten [33]. He died [Jan. 31] the eve of St. Bridget&apos;s-mass. He had then been bishop fifteen winters, and he was buried beside the former bishops. Ey-stan and Sigurd the <pb id=pb444a n=444>Jerusalem Journeyer were then kings in Norway. There was then passed from the birth of Christ eleven hundred and twenty-six winters [1133].

<p n=3.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> This circumstance took place in the north of the land the same day that bishop Thor-lac died, that at that very hour a learned and noble priest, whose name was Arne, the son of Beorn Carleif&apos;s son <hi>or</hi> Carls-efni&apos;s son, was going on his way, when he heard a fair song up in the heaven over him, and there was sung this <hi>cantilena</hi> of bishop Lambert:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l><hi lang=la>Sic animam claris coelorum reddidit astris,</hi>
</lg>

<p n=3.12.2>and it was found when the matter was looked into that no man had been near there. Wherefore many men paid great heed to this circumstance, and did not let it fall from their memory.

<p n=3.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> There is much notable and excellent to say of bishop Thor-lac Runolf&apos;s son. These tidings came about in his bishopdom, that there died Saint John bishop of Holar, and king Ey-stan and Sigurd the Jerusalem Journeyer. Priest Sæ-mund the historian died in the same spring [May 22, 1133], bishop Thor-lac having died the winter before. There was also the slaying of Thor-stan Hallward&apos;s son, and Thore Simon&apos;s son. Berg-thor the Law-speaker died then. Then was the lawsuit between Haf-lide Mar&apos;s son and Thor-gils Ord&apos;s son. Then also the peace between them came about.

<p n=3.14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Many chiefs were troublesome to bishop Thor-lac by means <pb id=pb445a n=445>of their disobedience, and some in evil life and breach of law, but he managed everything in the best possible way.



<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Magnus</hi> was the son of Einar, the son of Magnus, the son of Thor-stan, son of Hall o&apos; Side, and of Thor-rid, the daughter of Gils, the son of Hafr, the son of Swerting, the son of Hafr Beorn, the son of Molda-Gnup. Magnus was brought up with Einar, his father, and Ord-ny, his step-mother, the daughter of priest Magnus Thord&apos;s son of Reek-holt. They used to say that they loved him most of all their children. Magnus was put to his books and hallowed to all the orders before he became a priest.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Magnus was a fair man to look on, rather tall of stature, fair eyed, and well limbed, cheerful and pleasant mannered, and of the finest presence whether as regards his carriage or conversation. He was easy and lowly to all, magnanimous and steadfast in mind, resolute, loving to his kinsfolk, of good knowledge, and of fair speech. He proved also well suited to either estate, farming or trading abroad; he was above all a peace-maker wherever he was engaged in men&apos;s suits, and to this end he spared nought&mdash;neither words nor money.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> But when bishop Thor-lac died in the winter, the summer following Magnus was chosen bishop, and that summer he meant to go abroad [for his consecration], but was driven back to Blond-mouth, and was in Scal-holt through the winter, and went to Norway the next summer after. <pb id=pb446a n=446>He went abroad the summer that Magnus Sigurd&apos;s son and Harold Gille fought their battle at Fyri-laf, and Harold fled away south to Denmark [1134]. Magnus the bishop-elect went that same harvest-tide to Denmark, and gave gifts to king Harold, and there sprung up great friendship between them. Magnus went to see archbishop Auzur, and he received him worshipfully and hallowed him bishop on Simon&apos;s mass-day [Oct. 28, 1174]. The next winter after bishop Magnus was in Sarps-borg, until king Harold got into the country again; then he went to him and the king received him gladly and with the greatest worship and honour, and he was with him till he went back to Iceland, and he received worshipful gifts from the king&mdash;a drinking-cup which weighed eight marks, and there was afterwards a chalice made out of it, and many other gifts, for the king was bountiful and generous to his friends.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Magnus came to Iceland about the All-moot time, and came into Ey-frith, and rode to the Moot, and reached it while men were at the court, and there was a disagreement about a certain case, but with that there came a man into the court and said that bishop Magnus was just riding into the Moot. And men were so glad to hear this, that they all went home at once. And afterwards the bishop went out to the parvis in front of the church, and told all men these tidings that had come to pass in Norway whilst he was abroad, and all men thought much of his good speaking and fine presence.

<p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> And it was soon proved what a noble man he was in his magnanimity <pb id=pb447a n=447>and prudence, both for himself and others, in that he never spared any outlay as long as he was bishop to bring them to peace that were before at odds with one another, and he would always contribute out of his own to make up the difference between them; hence there arose no feuds between men as long as he was bishop. He kept the same lowly behaviour to the commonalty as before though he was bishop, and was on this account more beloved than most other men, and he had done great many things to deserve it.

<p n=4.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Bishop Magnus had the church at Scal-holt much enlarged, and then hallowed it, and the church day was fixed at the Selia-men&apos;s mass [July 8], but before then it had been at Cross-mass in the spring [May 3], when bishop Gizor had hallowed it. Bishop Magnus had the church hung with the tapestry, <hi>or</hi> broidered hangings, which he had brought out, and they were the greatest treasures. He also brought over the pall <hi>or</hi> brocade out of which that hackle <hi>or</hi> cope was made, which is called &lsquo;Scarmending.&rsquo;

<p n=4.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> He also strengthened the see much by many endowments, which have long been of the greatest profit both to the see and also to those who have had it in charge. He bought, for the see in Scal-holt, Arness and Sand-tongue and well-nigh all the West-man islands before he died, and purposed to have set up a monastery there, but his life did not last long enough.

<p n=4.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> But when bishop Cetil was now well seventy years of age, he went to the All-moot and commended himself to the prayers of all the clerks <pb id=pb448a n=448>in the synod of priests. And then bishop Magnus asked him to come home with him to Scal-holt to keep his church day [dedication feast] and a bridal that was to be there. The feast was so very splendid that it was a pattern after in Iceland; there was much mead mixed, and all other stores of the best that might be. But the Friday evening both bishops went to bathe at Bath-ridge after supper. And then it came to pass that bishop Cetil died there, and men thought this great news [July 6, 1145]. There was great grief at this feast among many of the guests till the bishop was buried and service done for him. But by the comforting speeches of bishop Magnus and the noble drink that was provided, men got their sorrow the sooner out of mind than they would otherwise have done.

<p n=4.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> And after that Beorn Gil&apos;s son was chosen bishop of Holar, and he went abroad with a writ of bishop Magnus to archbishop Anscel, and Beorn was hallowed bishop the next day after Cross-mass in spring [May 4, 1147] and came out hither the same summer, and was bishop at Holar fifteen winters.

<p n=4.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> But when fifteen winters were passed from the death of bishop Thor-lac Runolf&apos;s son, when bishop Magnus had been bishop fourteen winters, there befell Iceland such a calamity, as the like had never been for loss of men, when bishop Magnus had gone over the West-firths, and was in Hot-river-dale at Michaelmas. But the next day after, Michaelmas-day [Sept. 30, 1148], the house caught fire at supper-time, <pb id=pb449a n=449>and the bishop was not aware of it till &lsquo;it was manifest that it was not possible&rsquo; to get out, and it was as if he would not haste away to fly the awe of death which he could then see was upon him, because he had always prayed Almighty God that He would give him such a death as might manifest a cleansing passion [baptism of martyrdom] for him. Bishop Magnus lost his life there in the burning of the house, and with him two-and-seventy men. There died priest Tiorve Beadware&apos;s son who had always served him <hi>as chaplain</hi> in his bishopdom. There were seven priests more burnt, and all men of good family.

<p n=4.10.1>The bodies of the bishop and Tiorve were well-nigh unburnt, and were both carried to Scal-holt, and then there were sent two men of understanding to Fleets-lithe, priest Paul Solwi&apos;s son and Godmund Codran&apos;s son, to tell these news to Hall Tait&apos;s son and Eyjolf Sæmund&apos;s son and the other chiefs that were there at a feast with him. They went forth at once to Scal-holt, but from the West there came with the bodies of the bishop and Tiorve, priest God-mund Brand&apos;s son and Snorre Swerting&apos;s son and many more men of worship, and reached Scal-holt on Denis-mass [Oct. 9]. But on Jerome&apos;s-day [Oct. 10] the bodies were buried beside the graves of the former bishops. And naught more distressful hath ever happened than there did then in Hot-dale, where men were so fatally parted, that well-nigh every one had to part with a beloved friend.

<p n=4.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Magnus was hallowed bishop by archbishop Auzur in the days of <pb id=pb450a n=450>pope Anacletus, in the days of king Harold Gille and Magnus Sigurd&apos;s son, kings of Norway. He was then a winter more than half forty [36]. But he died in the house burning in Hot-river-dale, the fifth day of the week, one night after Michael-mass [Sept. 30]. There had then passed from the birth of Christ eleven hundred and forty winters and one [1148], and he had then been bishop fourteen winters.

<p n=4.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> While Magnus was bishop, the townsfolk betrayed Harold Gille, and then fell king Magnus Sigurd&apos;s son and Sigurd the false deacon; then came about the slaughter of Thore Stan-mod&apos;s son, and the death of archbishop Auzur, and of Raven son of Ulf-hedin the law-speaker, and of Finn the law-speaker, and of Henry king of England; and many another thing came about in his days which was great tidings.



<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> After the death of bishop Magnus, the next summer they proceeded to choose a man to bishop, and Hall Tait&apos;s son went abroad. [<hi>He went to Rome and back again</hi>], and he spoke their speech everywhere, as if he were a native of the place at which he was at. Hall died at Trect [Utrecht?] as they were on their way back, and he was not yet hallowed bishop. And when the news of his death got about in Iceland, and men must needs choose another bishop, it was the choice of all that had a voice, and the advice of Beorn bishop of Holar, to choose to bishop a north-countryman, whose name was <hi rend=sc>Clong</hi>, and he was the son of Thor-stan and of Hall-dora Eyjolf&apos;s daughter.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Clong was a fair man to look on, and of middle stature, brisk, and <pb id=pb451a n=451>of good presence and accomplished and a good penman, and the best of clerks. He was a good speaker, and true to his friends, and a very good poet. He had been with bishop Cetil, and in many particulars had his good ways of life.

<p n=5.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Clong went out the same summer as he had been chosen bishop with the writ of bishop Beorn to go to archbishop Anscel, and he hallowed Clong bishop twelve nights after Mary-mass in spring [April 6]. The very next summer he came out to Iceland. And there was then come from the south from Rome and all the way from Bari Gizor Hall&apos;s son, and he came out to Iceland with him, and so men had to welcome together the two greatest jewels of men that were in Iceland. On board the two ships there came out big timber, which bishop Clong had hewn in Norway for the church which he had made in Scal-holt, and which was in every way glorious above every other building that was built in Iceland, both with regard to its timbers and to its workmanship.

<p n=5.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> And when the bishop came to the see in Scal-holt, he was straightway so beloved by the commonalty that even those men held him most dear when he had been a short while in the see, that had formerly been rather set against him in their hearts. And it is natural that it should have been so, for he was magnanimous and a generous giver to his friends, and open-handed and an alms-giver to the poor. Lenient and lowly to all, cheerful he was and jocular, and an even-tempered man with his friends [a man of authority and decision], so that he was looked <pb id=pb452a n=452>to for all decisions, as long as he was in the see, whatever kind of thing there was need of there.

<p n=5.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> He began his church-building when he had been one winter in his see. It seemed to others that there was a great outlay in church building every season, both in stores of timber and skilled workmen&apos;s wages, and the keep of them that were employed. And men of understanding thought that it would take up all the money revenue of the see, both tithes and other incomes. On the other hand, there was such great outlay needed for the household every season, by reason of the number of people, and hospitality, and other outgoings, <hi>or</hi> calls, that it seemed as if <hi>that</hi> would need all the revenue which the see possessed. In the third place, he had such largely attended feasts, and great gifts he gave his friends who were both many and of good estate, so that there was needed for this outlay endless money. But Almighty God, that giveth all good as He willeth, let him fall short of naught that he needed, whether for his church building or other calls upon him which the bishop wished to maintain as long as he lived. These were the chief of the workmen at the church in Scal-holt: Arne, who was called the master-workman, and Beorn the skilful the son of Thor-wald; Illugi Leif&apos;s son also wrought on the wood <hi>as carpenter</hi>. And when the church was quite finished Run-olf bishop&apos;s son [bp. Cetil&apos;s son] made this verse on it:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Proud is the hall that the ruler raised to Christ:
    <l>Such a plan springs from a good root.
    <pb id=pb453a n=453><l>It was of good omen that Beorn built this house of God:
    <l>Peter [the Patron] hath acquired the noble handiwork of Arne and Beorn.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 282.]


<p n=5.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Bishop Clong was so great a lawyer that he was <corr sic=alway>always</corr> sought to <hi>or</hi> consulted for help in most cases, both because he was a great chief, and by reason of his wisdom and of his power of speaking; he was also very well versed in the Constitution: wherefore those chiefs always had the better in their cases whose party the bishop joined, and no great case was decided without bishop Clong being called upon by both sides. They were also his trustiest friends that were the most worshipful men in Iceland, John Loft&apos;s son and Gizor Hall&apos;s son. Bishop Clong also exchanged gifts with the greatest chiefs in other lands whom he came near to. And in such wise he became well-beloved both abroad and in his own land.

<p n=5.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> And when the church was finished at Scal-holt, and the bishop thought it fit for hallowing, he made a great feast and noble to his friends, and bade thither bishop Brand and abbot Nicholas [of Thwart-water], and many chiefs; and there was a very great number of guests bidden. They both hallowed the church at Scal-holt, Clong and Beorn, the one without and the other within, and both hallowed it to Peter the Apostle as it had been before; but abbot Nicholas held the discourse [?]. This was on the day of the passion of Vitus [June 15]. And after the hours, bishop Clong asked all those who had been at the hallowing of the church, and who thought fit to do so, to take dinner there. And this was done more out of magnificence than prudence, <pb id=pb454a n=454>because it is always found to go one way when a man depends <hi>or</hi> listens to many fools in cases where one wise man may well foresee with prudence. And these gave proof of this forthcoming, for there were no less than seven hundred [840] men took dinner there, and the stores began to run short before the end. But the feast was very splendid as all those thought who were bidden there, and all men of worship were sent on their way with great gifts.

<p n=5.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Bishop Clong had the church that he had built at Scal-holt adorned in the best way he could, until it was fairly fitted in every way. He had a gold chalice made and set with gem-stones, and gave it to the church. He also had a book of hours written much better than what was there before. It was his whole business at once to teach the young priests, and recite and sing the psalter, and he would give orders withal wherever it was needed. He was more self-disciplined in many ways than the other bishops before him had been, in vigils and fastings and wearing of garments. He would often walk bare-foot of a night in snow and frost.

<p n=5.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> When Clong had been bishop ten winters, bishop Beorn of Holar died two nights after Luke&apos;s-mass [Oct. 20, 1163], when he had been bishop fifteen winters. And the next summer priest Brand Sæ-mund&apos;s son was chosen bishop, and he took out with him the writ of bishop Clong to go to archbishop Ey-stan withal, and he was hallowed bishop on the last Mary-mass [Sept. 8], and he was in Beorg-win [Bergen] <pb id=pb455a n=455>through the winter, and John Loft&apos;s son also, and afterwards the bishop came out [to Iceland] the next summer, and sat down in his bishop&apos;s see at Holar, whereto he was hallowed.

<p n=5.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Bishop Clong kept up till his old age his dignity and popularity, so that all they that were most worthy held him in high worth. But when he began to grow old there came upon him a great disease, and it took him first in the feet, which began to break open because of the cold and penance and discomfort he had had. But when he began to grow weary, because of old age and lack of health, then he sent out his writ to archbishop Ey-stan asking his leave to put off his hand and give over the land and duties of his bishopric, and to take another man to be bishop in his stead, according to the example of bishop Gizor. But word came back from the archbishop that he had leave to choose and send a bishop to be hallowed, but that he should maintain the performing of the hours and preaching so long as he was able, though he were not able to make his visitations.

<p n=5.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Bishop Clong went to the All-moot and there sought of the chiefs that a man should be chosen as bishop, but it was the wish of all that he himself should choose him whom he would, and he chose Thor-lac Thor-hall&apos;s son who was then abbot in Thick-by. And it was a great piece of good fortune for bishop Clong to have chosen that man after him who is now a true saint, and all men know that there hath never been any man in Iceland proven so to be, save the holy bishop Thor-lac <pb id=pb456a n=456>who was thus chosen bishop. Bishop Clong still kept the management of the bishop&apos;s stead [Scal-holt] that season, albeit it was not easy to manage, for at that time there was [but a poor income] to the bishop&apos;s stead, but the out-goings did not lessen at all. Bishop Clong himself handed over the management of the stead, and gave it into the hands of bishop Thor-lac and the men whom he chose to help him therein. And the last season that bishop Clong was alive he well-nigh never rose out of his bed. Wherefore he made him ready against his death, as a wise man would especially choose to do after long sickness.

<p n=5.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Clong was hallowed bishop in the days of pope Eugenius by archbishop Ans-kell, and in the days of Ey-stan and Sigurd, kings of Norway. He was then seven winters of the fifth ten [47], and he was bishop four-and-twenty winters. He died three nights after Matthias-mass [Feb. 28], and so his anniversary goes&mdash;but four if it be a leap-year; it was then Washing-day [Saturday] in Ember-days after Good Friday. There were then passed from the birth of Christ according to the general count of years, eleven hundred and sixty-nine years [1176]. And he was buried beside the other bishops. But abbot Thor-lac stood over him both at his burial and his death, and it was in every way lucky for him that such a man should stand by him both in his life and death as the blessed bishop Thor-lac is now proved before God to be.

<p n=5.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Many great tidings befell while Clong was bishop, though here not many are set down. There was the fall of the brethren, the sons of <pb id=pb457a n=457>Gelle, the kings of Norway, Sigurd first and then Ey-stan, and last Inge, and the death of archbishop John, and the fall of Hacon Broad-shoulders, and the death of Beorn bishop of Holar. In the days of bishop Clong was the martyrdom of Saint Thomas, archbishop in England. And in his days there came fire up in Hecla-fell for the second time. There was also an earthquake whereby there was loss of life. These men (Icelanders) died while Clong was bishop: John Sigmund&apos;s son, and Hren the abbot, Paul Thord&apos;s son, and God-mund Cetil&apos;s son, priest Beorn-hedin the son of Sigurd, and Beine his brother. The slaughter of Helge Shafto&apos;s son, and Nicholas Sigurd&apos;s son was cut down at that time in Thrand-ham.

<p n=5.14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> Now it must be manifest to us that there hath never been a man of such magnificence in many ways in Iceland as bishop Clong was, and we may also believe that his munificence will be remembered as long as Iceland is inhabited.


<p>[<hi>Epilogue and Prologue</hi>.]

<p>Now we have come to the history that is to be told of the blessed bishop Thor-lac, and this history [of him] is here composed for the entertainment of good men [and for their good], as the others were which have been written down here before. And well as the history of each one goes, yet is there no fairer example in every way than that which shall be told of that precious friend of God, bishop Thor-lac, who by right may be called Beam and Gem of Saints, both in this land and other <pb id=pb458a n=458>places throughout the world. He may of a truth be called the Apostle of Iceland, just as the holy Patrec is called the Apostle of Ireland, for both these performed the mighty works of the very apostles in their preaching and long-suffering towards disobedient and wicked men.


</div2>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=s3.3.2 lang=is rend="align-with(en.thorlaks)">
<head>ÞORLÁKS SAGA.</head>


<p n=1.1><anchor id=a458.5><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Þann tíma es stýrðe Goðs Cristne Anacletus pape, en<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a458.6>konungar vóro yfer Norege Magnús Sigurðar son, <anchor id=a458.7>ok Haraldr Gille, þá vas f&oeacute;ddr í héraðe því á Íslande es Fliótz&shy;hlíð <anchor id=a458.8>heiter Þorlákr enn Helge, á b&oeacute; þeim es heiter at Hlíðar-enda, <anchor id=a458.9>á því áre es Þorlákr byscop Rúnolfs son andaðesc.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a458.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Eige bar af því n&aolig;fn þeirra saman, at hann være efter Þorláke<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a458.11>byscope heitenn, heldr af því, at sá es allt veit, ok &aolig;llo stýrer, vilde <anchor id=a458.12>þá virðing g&oelig;ra Þorláks byscops ens fyrra, at hans nafn vere <anchor id=a458.13>iamnan elskað ok dýrkað af &aolig;llom þeim m&aolig;nnom es síðan hefer <anchor id=a458.14>auðet orðet at heyra ok vita dýrð ens sæla Þorláks byscops. Hefer <anchor id=a458.15>Almáttegr Goð þá dýrð veitta nafne ens sæla byscops, sem fyrr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a458.16>sagðe Salomon enn Spake, at &lsquo;betra være gótt nafn an mikel auð&shy;æve;&rsquo; <anchor id=a458.17>en þat vas sannlega gótt es helgat vas under heilagre skírn, <anchor id=a458.18>en blezat síðan með byscoplegre tign. Hefer sá orðz-kviðr í þesso <anchor id=a458.19>sannasc, at &lsquo;þat es spáð es spaker mæla,&rsquo; at þat nafn verðr nú <anchor id=a459.1><pb id=pb459 n=459><note place=margin>[89: 2.]</note>m&aolig;rgom golle betra þeim es á hann heita í sínom nauðsynjom. <anchor id=a459.2>Þat sannasc nú ok eige síðr í þesso mále, sem í &aolig;ðrom stað seger <anchor id=a459.3>Heil&aolig;g Ritning, at &lsquo;betra es gótt namn an dýrleg smyrsl:&rsquo; af þvi at <anchor id=a459.4>nú berr oft þá raun á, at nú verðr oftlega þat gr&oeacute;tt<note place=apparatus id=an459.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>gr&oeacute;tt]</ab> B; gert, Cd.</note> af ákalle hans <anchor id=a459.5>nafns, es hvártke hefer áðr mátt heilt verða af smyrslom né af<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a459.6>lækningom þeim es menn hafa áðr með faret ok til leitað.

<p n=2.1><anchor id=a459.7><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Faðer Þorláks vas Þórhallr en móðer Halla; þau vóro <anchor id=a459.8>vinsæl, ok vel at ser. Hann vas far-maðr áðr hann <anchor id=a459.9>sette bú, en hon vas fengs&aolig;m ok forvitra. Þau vóro bæðe góðrar <anchor id=a459.10>ættar ok g&aolig;fogra manna framm í kyn. En þat má nú auðsýnt<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a459.11>vesa at Goð hefer þat fagrlega við oss emnt<note place=apparatus id=an459.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>emnt]</ab> B; ent, Cd.</note> es hann hét fyre munn <anchor id=a459.12>Davíðs spámannz, at &lsquo;blezat munde verða kyn réttlátra manna,&rsquo; <anchor id=a459.13>ok má siá at þat hefer nú fagrlega fyllzc ok framm komet í lífe ens <anchor id=a459.14>sæla Þorláks byscops. Frændr Þorláks ener n&aoacute;nozto vóro réttláter <anchor id=a459.15>ok ráðvander; h&aolig;fðo fi&aolig;l-skylde mikel<note place=apparatus id=an459.3><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> fiolskyldor miklar, B.</note>, en feár-hlut ú-gnógan.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a459.16>Þorlákr vas þá ungr at aldre es þau brugðo búe síno faðer hans <anchor id=a459.17>ok móðer.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a459.18><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann vas úlíkr flestom ungom m&aolig;nnom í sínne upp-f&oeacute;ðingo, <anchor id=a459.19>auðráðr ok auð-veldr í &aolig;llo; hlýðenn ok hog-þeckr hverjom <anchor id=a459.20>manne; fá-látr ok fá-lyndr um allt; nýtr ok nám-giarn þegar á<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a459.21>unga aldre. Hann nam Psaltara áðr an sundr-skilja yrðe lið<note place=apparatus id=an459.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lið]</ab> B; born, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a459.22>móðor hans ok f&aolig;ðor, en líteð hafðe hann bóc-nám annat í fyrsto.

<pb id=pb460 n=460>
<note place=margin>[90: 3.]</note>

<p><anchor id=a460.1>En svá vas hann þegar athoga-samr á unga aldre, at m&aolig;rgom <anchor id=a460.2>vitrom m&aolig;nnom fundosc orð um<note place=apparatus id=an460.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>orð um]</ab> þat, add. Cd.</note>. En þótt hann hefðe eige miket <anchor id=a460.3>nám á barns aldre, þá geck fyrer þat í hans h&aoacute;ttom sem hann <anchor id=a460.4>hefðe nálega allt þat numet sem þá mátte hónom betr sama an <anchor id=a460.5>áðr. Hann þýddesc eige leika né lausung; vas hann vakr ok vel<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a460.6>stilltr; ok lét þess snimma á kenna, at hann m&oelig;nde þau heilræðe <anchor id=a460.7>þýðasc vilja, es Davíð kenner í Psaltara, at &lsquo;maðr skyle hneigja <anchor id=a460.8>sik frá íllo ok g&oelig;ra gótt; leita friðarens, ok fylgja hónom.&rsquo;

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a460.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Sem móðer hans sá af sínne vizko með Goðs forsi&aoacute;, <anchor id=a460.10>hve dýrlegr kennemaðr Þorlákr mátte verða af sínom<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a460.11>góðom h&aoacute;ttom, ef nám hans genge framm, þá réðosc þau m&oelig;ðgin <anchor id=a460.12>í enn &oeacute;zta h&aolig;foð-stað í Odda under h&aolig;nd Eyjolfe preste Sæmundar <anchor id=a460.13>syne, es bæðe hafðe h&aolig;fðingskap mikenn ok lærdóm góðan, <anchor id=a460.14>g&oeacute;zko ok vitz-mune gn&oeacute;gre an flester aðrer. Ok heyrðo ver enn <anchor id=a460.15>sæla Þorlák þat vitne bera hónom, at hann þóttesc trautt þvílíkan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a460.16>dýrðar-mann reynt hafa, sem hann vas: ok sýnde hann þat síðan, <anchor id=a460.17>at hann vilde eige hiá ser láta líða þau heilræðe um sínn meistara, <anchor id=a460.18>sem til gaf enn sæle Póll Postole sínom lære-sveinom, talande svá <anchor id=a460.19>til þeirra þeim á-heyrandom: &lsquo;Veseð ér efter-glíkjarar míner sem <anchor id=a460.20>ek em Christz;&rsquo; af þvi at svá bar opt til, þá es ver hældom hans<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a460.21>h&aoacute;ttom góðom, at hann kvað þat vesa siðvenjor Eyjolfs fóstra síns <anchor id=a461.1><pb id=pb461 n=461><note place=margin>[91: 3.]</note>Sæmundar sonar. G&oelig;rðe hann þat maklega þótt hann virðe hann <anchor id=a461.2>mikels í sínne um-r&oeacute;ðo, þvi at þat vas hónom í at launa.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a461.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Eyjolfr virðe Þorlák mest allra sínna lære-sveina um þat allt, <anchor id=a461.4>es til kennemann-skapar kom, af þvi at hann sá af sínne vizko ok <anchor id=a461.5>hans meðferð sem síðarr reyndesc, at hann m&oelig;nde fyrer þeim<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a461.6>&aolig;llom verða um þat; sem síðarr seger.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a461.7><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þorlákr tók vígslor þegar á unga aldre allar, unz hann vas <anchor id=a461.8>diácn, af Magnúse byscope; en hann vas þá fimmtán vetra gamall <anchor id=a461.9>es byscop andaðesc. En því fóro vígslor hans skiótt framm, at þat <anchor id=a461.10>fundo yferboðarner, at hann hog-leidde sialfr, ok gætte í út-horn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a461.11>þess vanda, es fylgðe hverre vígslo þeirre es hann tók: ok svá <anchor id=a461.12>skiótt sem framm fór nám hans ok vígslor, þá lét hann til sín at <anchor id=a461.13>fyrer-boðe<note place=apparatus id=an461.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at fyrer-boðe]</ab> A, B, = fyrra bragðe?</note> koma með ráðenne staðfesto alla mann-koste þá es <anchor id=a461.14>vígslonom &aoacute;tto til at heyra. Lét hann ser þat í hog koma, meðan <anchor id=a461.15>nám vas minna en vígslor smære, es Ysidorus byscop mæler, spakr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a461.16>ok heilagr: at &lsquo;bæðe es nytsamlegt at nema mart, ok lifa réttlega; <anchor id=a461.17>en ef eige má bæðe senn verða, þá es enn dýrlegra at lifa vel.&rsquo; <anchor id=a461.18>Hann gætte þess ok, þótt meirr fylgðe lítilæte ok þiónkan enom <anchor id=a461.19>smærrom vígslom, helðr an s&oeacute;mð mikel veraldar virðinga, at hann <anchor id=a461.20>hélt &aolig;llom mann-dygðom þeim es fylgja &aoacute;tto enom minna vanda,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a461.21>þá es hann vas hafiðr á ena hærre palla vanda ok virðingar með <anchor id=a461.22>enom st&oeacute;rrom vígslom.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a461.23><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Sú vas þá hans iðja, es hann vas á ungom aldre, at hann <anchor id=a461.24>vas l&aolig;ngom at bók-náme; en at rite oftlega; á b&oeacute;nom þess í <anchor id=a462.1><pb id=pb462 n=462><note place=margin>[91: 4.]</note>miðlom; en nam, þá es eige dvalðe annat, þat es móðer hans <anchor id=a462.2>kunne kenna hónom, ætt-víse ok mann-fr&oeacute;ðe.

<p n=4.1><anchor id=a462.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Þá er Magnús byscop vas andaðr, þá vas nockora stund <anchor id=a462.4>byscopslaust í Scála-holte; ok g&oelig;rðesc þá kenne-manna-fátt; <anchor id=a462.5>varð þat þá ráð manna, at biðja Bi&aolig;rn byscop til at<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a462.6>g&oelig;ra vígslor á Alþinge; ok lét hann at b&oeacute;n manna, ok vas þá <anchor id=a462.7>vígðr til prestz Þorlákr ok marger aðrer kenne-menn. En es hann <anchor id=a462.8>vas prestr, ok hann tók sialfr stiórn ok forráð tíða-g&oelig;rðar, þá vas <anchor id=a462.9>þat brátt auðsýnt, hvé geymenn ok gætenn hann m&oelig;nde at vesa <anchor id=a462.10>um tíðer sínar, ok allt þat annat es hónom vas á hende folget með<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a462.11>þeirre vígslo es hann hafðe þá fenget. Hann fór þá enn lítelátlega <anchor id=a462.12>með síno ráðe sem fyrr; ok tók ser, þá es leið<note place=apparatus id=an462.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es leið]</ab> add. B.</note> eno fyrsto missere, lítel <anchor id=a462.13>þíng fé-s&aolig;m; ok hafðe þau nockora stund; ok varð hónom bæðe gótt <anchor id=a462.14>til feár ok vinsælða, af þvi at nálega unne hónom hug-&aoacute;stom <anchor id=a462.15>hvert barn es hiá hónom vas. Hafa ok þau m&aolig;rg góð d&oeacute;me sótt<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a462.16>enn sæla Þorlák byscop es siald-gæt hafa orðet m&aolig;rgom &aolig;ðrom, <anchor id=a462.17>at hann vas þá bæðe senn, ungr ok gamall; vas ungr at aldre, en <anchor id=a462.18>gamall at r&aoacute;ðom. Hann skrýddesc þá enn á nýja-leik m&aolig;rgom <anchor id=a462.19>mann-kostom; ok allra mest þeim es Davíð kallaðe kenne-man&shy;nenom <anchor id=a462.20>í skyldazta lage at &lsquo;þeir skyldo skrýðasc hialpræðom ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a462.21>réttlæte.&rsquo; Ok sýnde hann þat síðan alla sína æve, at hónom varð <anchor id=a463.1><pb id=pb463 n=463><note place=margin>[92: 4.]</note>þat nálega aldrege of-hent<note place=apparatus id=an463.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>aldrege of-hent]</ab> B; afhent, Cd.; cp. mod. mér er þat um hönd.</note> þá es til þurfte at taka, ok nuto þeir aller <anchor id=a463.2>es hónom vóro í n&aoacute;nd.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a463.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En es því hafðe nockora stund framm faret, ok hónom vas þá <anchor id=a463.4>ok gótt til feár orðet, þá fýstesc hann útan-ferðar, ok vilde þá <anchor id=a463.5>kanna siðo annarra góðra manna; ok fór hann af Íslande. Ok es<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a463.6>ecke sagt af hans ferðom unz hann kom í Paris, ok vas þar í scóla <anchor id=a463.7>svá lenge sem hann þóttesc þurfa til þess náms sem hann vilde <anchor id=a463.8>þar nema. Þaðan fór hann til Englannz, ok vas í Lincolne, ok <anchor id=a463.9>nam þar enn miket nám, ok far-sæligt<note place=apparatus id=an463.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>farsæligt]</ab> B; þarfsælegt, Cd.</note> bæðe ser ok &aolig;ðrom; ok <anchor id=a463.10>hafðe þá enn miket gótt þat af ser at miðla í kenningom sínom, es<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a463.11>hann vas áðr trautt iam-vel til búenn sem áðr.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a463.12><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En es hann hafðe vj &aoacute;r af Íslande veret, þá vitjaðe hann aftr <anchor id=a463.13>til frænda sínna ok fóstr-iarðar; ok urðo hónom fegner frændr ok <anchor id=a463.14>fóst-br&oeacute;ðr, ok aller hans ást-viner; ok móðer hans þeim mun <anchor id=a463.15>fegnozt ok systr, sem þeim vas mest at-langt; en mest niðr-fall í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a463.16>ef nockot hefðe tálmat hans til-kv&aoacute;mo.

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a463.17><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Móðer hans fylgðe hónom í sífello, síðan es hann kom út; <anchor id=a463.18>en hann veitte ástsamlega á-si&aoacute; systrom sínom, Ragneiðe, móðor <anchor id=a463.19>Póls es síðan varð byscop efter Þorlák byscop; en annarre Eyv&aolig;ro: <anchor id=a463.20>ok hafðe hann miok langa skap-raun af þeirra h&aoacute;ttom, es eige<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a463.21>vóro efter hans skap-lynde: en þó kom þat til góðra lykða um <anchor id=a464.1><pb id=pb464 n=464><note place=margin>[93: 5.]</note>síðer, með Goðs miskunn, ok góðo til-stille þeirra manna es hlut <anchor id=a464.2>&aoacute;tto í, ok góðvilja þeirra sialfra.

<p n=4.5><anchor id=a464.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hann vas þá með sama lítelæte eðr meira, es hann kom aftr <anchor id=a464.4>or sínne braut-ferð, sem hann hafðe áðr veret; en eige hafðe hann <anchor id=a464.5>sótt skart eða þessa heims skraut, sem margr annarr, es minne<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a464.6>fremð ok gæfo s&oeacute;ker í sínne braut-ferð, an hann hafðe sótt. Þat <anchor id=a464.7>es ok margra manna siðvenja, at þeir búasc þá vandlegar at v&aoacute;pnom <anchor id=a464.8>ok klæðom, es þeir koma út or f&aolig;r, ok þeir koma í meira <anchor id=a464.9>val um slíka hlute, an þeim hafe áðr til gefeð<note place=apparatus id=an464.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>til gefeð]</ab> thus; om. B.</note>. En Þorlákr hafðe <anchor id=a464.10>ser at farar-blóma lærdóm ok lítelæte, ok marga góða siðo þá es<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a464.11>hann sá í sínne ferð með m&aolig;rgom góðom m&aolig;nnom, byscopom ok <anchor id=a464.12>&aolig;ðrom lærðom m&aolig;nnom ok ráð-v&aolig;ndom, þeim es enn ero nær-komner <anchor id=a464.13>at heims-vistom<note place=apparatus id=an464.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at heims-v.]</ab> add. fragm. 383.</note> því sem fyrer &aolig;ndverðo hefer hafezc Goðs <anchor id=a464.14>Cristne ok síðan magnasc.

<p n=4.6><anchor id=a464.15><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þorlákr vas þá enn með frændom sínom nockora vetr, ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a464.16>hafðe þá miok góðan feár-hlut með h&aolig;ndom; ok s&aoacute; þat marger <anchor id=a464.17>vitrer menn þeir es hiá hónom vóro, at hann vas þá enn til margra <anchor id=a464.18>hluta stórra ok góðra enn betr fallenn, þeirra es miklo varðaðe, <anchor id=a464.19>an áðr hann f&oeacute;re<note place=apparatus id=an464.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f&oeacute;re]</ab> (subj.), B; fór, Cd.</note> braut.

<p n=4.7><anchor id=a464.20><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> En es eige liðo langar stunder, þá fýsto frændr Þorláks, at<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a464.21>hann skylde staðfesta sítt ráð nockot meirr an þá vas; ok vildo <anchor id=a464.22>þeir helzt at hann kvángaðesc; þóttosc þeir þat siá mega, at hann <anchor id=a465.1><pb id=pb465 n=465><note place=margin>[93: 5.]</note>vas<note place=apparatus id=an465.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas]</ab> add. B.</note> fé-maðr ok forsiá-maðr mikell um flest. En Goðs Cristne <anchor id=a465.2>hefer lenge eflsc ok magnasc, ok vaxet vande lærðra manna, fyrer <anchor id=a465.3>boðorða saker; af þvi at þá vas eige um þat miok vandat af yfer-boðom, <anchor id=a465.4>þótt prestar fenge eckna; en nú es þat fyrer-boðet. En <anchor id=a465.5>þá vóro þær konor svá í heraðe, es baztr kostr þótte í vesa, es<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a465.6>eckjor vóro. Nú varð Þorlákr at því ráðe eggjaðr; ok fór hann <anchor id=a465.7>síðan, ok frændr hans með hónom, á b&oeacute; þann es í Háfe heiter, <anchor id=a465.8>ok ætlaðe at biðja ser eckjo þeirrar virðolegrar, es þar bió; ok <anchor id=a465.9>vas við þeim teket þar forkunnar-vel. En es þeir tóko svefn efter <anchor id=a465.10>góðan beina á þeirre enne s&aolig;mo nótt, þá sýndese Þorláke í draume<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a465.11>maðr g&aolig;folegr yfer-litz ok með s&oeacute;melegom búninge, ok mælte: <anchor id=a465.12>&lsquo;Hvert hafeð ér ætlað higat yðvart &oelig;rende,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;ef ér <anchor id=a465.13>megot ráða?&rsquo; Þorlákr svarar: &lsquo;Ec veit eige (at) hverjo verða <anchor id=a465.14>vill,&rsquo; seger hann. Sá mælte es hónom sýndesc í draumenom: <anchor id=a465.15>&lsquo;Veit-ek,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;at þú ætlar þer her kono at biðja; en þú<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a465.16>skalt þat mál eige upp láta koma, af þvi at þat mun eige ráðet <anchor id=a465.17>verða; ok es þer &aolig;nnor brúðr miklo &oeacute;ðre hugot; ok skaltu &oelig;ngrar <anchor id=a465.18>annarar fá.&rsquo; En es hann hafðe þetta mælt, þá hvarf hann frá <anchor id=a465.19>hónom at sýn. En Þorlákr vaknar; ok vas hann þá svá frá horfenn <anchor id=a465.20>þesso mále, at hann bað aldregi kono þaðan frá. Fóro þeir á<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a465.21>braut, ok vóro þau (eckjan) góðer viner alla æve síðan. En þeim <anchor id=a465.22>þótte nockot kynlegt, hví hann vas svá hverf-lyndr í þesso mále, <anchor id=a465.23>áðr þeir visso hvat til hafðe komet; en þá kunno aller vel es visso. <anchor id=a466.1><pb id=pb466 n=466><note place=margin>[94: 6.]</note>Efter þenna atburð allan iam-saman, þá kveykðesc eige hogr hans <anchor id=a466.2>til metnaðar þó (at) hónom være vitrað af Goðe, at hann ætlaðe <anchor id=a466.3>hónom enn &oeacute;ðre forl&aolig;g, an hans frændr hefðe til hogat, ok hann <anchor id=a466.4>sialfr sam-þyksc við; heldr tók<note place=apparatus id=an466.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tók]</ab> iók, B.</note> hann sik þá því fastara í lítelæte <anchor id=a466.5>efter allra enna b&aolig;zto manna d&oeacute;mom, at því lítelátare hafa aller<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a466.6>veret sem þeir hafa hærra genget í Goðs auglite; efter heilræðom <anchor id=a466.7>Almáttegs Goðs, es hann mæler svá, at &lsquo;Hverr sá er sik læger, <anchor id=a466.8>mon verða upp hafiðr,&rsquo; ok, &lsquo;Nemeð-ér at mer, þvi at ek em miúkr <anchor id=a466.9>ok lítelátr í hiarta míno; ok monoð-ér finna hvílð &aolig;ndom yðrom.&rsquo; <anchor id=a466.10>Ok þá es þann veg hafðe eige lenge framm faret, þá lýstesc brátt<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a466.11>yfer hvat hónom bió í skape.

<p n=5.1><anchor id=a466.12><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Í þann tíma réð fyrer (þeim) b&oeacute; es í Kirkjo-b&oeacute; heiter <anchor id=a466.13>á Síðo, ágætr kenne-maðr sá es Biarn-heðinn hét, ok <anchor id=a466.14>vas enn dýrðlegzte maðr at alþýðo dóme. Hann vas vitr maðr <anchor id=a466.15>ok vinsæll; &oelig;rr ok miok orð-f&oeacute;rr; linr ok lærðr vel; en es hvárr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a466.16>þeirra frá til annars, þeirra Þorláks, þá g&oelig;rðe hvárn þeirra fúsan til <anchor id=a466.17>sam-visto við annan; ok lét Goð þat efter þeim, sem hann es vanr, <anchor id=a466.18>at láta réttar fýster efter ráð-v&aolig;ndom m&aolig;nnom; ok fór þá at <anchor id=a466.19>vista-fare Þorlákr í Kirkjo-b&oeacute;; ok vas þar vj<note place=apparatus id=an466.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vj]</ab> A, B.</note> vetr í samt. Ok <anchor id=a466.20>fengo þeir þat þá reynt es Goð seger svá, at &lsquo;Ok mítt es sætt en<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a466.21>byrðr mín es létt.&rsquo;

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a466.22><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Vas þá bæðe, at eykerner vóro sterker fengner under oket, <anchor id=a467.1><pb id=pb467 n=467><note place=margin>[95: 6.]</note>enda b&aoacute;ro þeir<note place=apparatus id=an467.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> en báru þó, Cd.</note> léttlega; af þvi at þeir tóko þá nálega allan vanda <anchor id=a467.2>at bera fyr því folke &aolig;llo, es þau heroð bygðo es þeim vóro nálæg. <anchor id=a467.3>Skifto þeir ok svá við sína under-menn, at þeir tóko af þeim þungar <anchor id=a467.4>byrðar, es á þá h&aolig;fðo lagzt af mótgerðom ok mein-mælom við <anchor id=a467.5>Goð ok góða menn, en efter-læte við Fiándann; en l&aolig;gðo á þá í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a467.6>staðenn Goðs byrðar, léttar ok linar, í hógværom skriftom ok auð-veldom <anchor id=a467.7>yfer-bótom. Drógosc þeir merkilega þau n&aolig;fn under, es <anchor id=a467.8>Almáttegr Goð kallaðe sína Postola liós þessa heims; þvi at þeir <anchor id=a467.9>lýsto líknar-braut til eilífra fagnaða, bæðe með ágætlegom kenningom <anchor id=a467.10>orða ok dýrlegra d&oeacute;ma. Mátte þat siá á hvers-daglegom<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a467.11>þeirra atferðom, at þeir urðo sialdan af-hoga því, es Goð mælte <anchor id=a467.12>til sínna lære-sveina: &lsquo;Lýse liós yðvart fyre m&aolig;nnom,&rsquo; sagðe hann, <anchor id=a467.13>&lsquo;at þeir neme yðvar atferðer góðar; (ok) dýrke þeir<note place=apparatus id=an467.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dýrke þeir]</ab> dýrke þér, A, B.</note> F&aolig;ðor yðvarn <anchor id=a467.14>þann es á himnom es.&rsquo; Svá sýndesc þeim sem ásamt vóro við <anchor id=a467.15>þá, sem nálega være &oelig;ngar þær stunder, at eige mætte nockot þat<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a467.16>af þeim lesa<note place=apparatus id=an467.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lesa]</ab> B; hafa, Cd.</note>, es g&oeacute;ðe vóro í; vóro þeir ok svá sam-lynder ok <anchor id=a467.17>sam-þycker at góðo, sem Lucas seger af Goðs Postolom, at svá <anchor id=a467.18>mátte þickja sem þeir hefðe &lsquo;eitt hiarta ok eina &aolig;nd.&rsquo; Fór þat þá <anchor id=a467.19>víða um héruð, hverso ó-<hi>g</hi>líker þeir þótto flestom m&aolig;nnom vesa <anchor id=a467.20>í sínom fram-ferðom. Vas þat þá þegar vitra manna mál, at hverge<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a467.21>m&oelig;nde vesa vænna til at leita an þar, þótt mann þyrfte at ráða til <anchor id=a468.1><pb id=pb468 n=468><note place=margin>[95: 7.]</note>ens mesta vanda á Íslande; ok vas þat eige mis-sét<note place=apparatus id=an468.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mis-sét]</ab> missýne, B.</note>, at því sem <anchor id=a468.2>síðar reyndesc.

<p n=6.1><anchor id=a468.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> Fyrer þeim b&oeacute; í því heraðe es annarr vas baztr, ok <anchor id=a468.4>Þykkva-b&oeacute;r heiter<note place=apparatus id=an468.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Þykkva-b&oeacute;r heiter]</ab> om. A, B, add. 209.</note>, réð sá maðr es Þorkell hét, ok <anchor id=a468.5>vas Geira son<note place=apparatus id=an468.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok vas Geira son]</ab> om. A, B, add. 209.</note>, auðegr at fé, en spakr at mann-vite. En es hann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a468.6>tók nockot at eldasc, en átte &oelig;nga all-nána frændr til erfðar efter <anchor id=a468.7>sik, þá g&oeacute;dde hann sína frændr með auð&oelig;fom; en frelste ser þann <anchor id=a468.8>fiár-hlut til forráða es efter vas, mikenn ok fríðan. Hann lýste þá <anchor id=a468.9>yfer því, at hann vilde Crist kiósa ok hans helga menn ser til <anchor id=a468.10>erfingja allz þess feár es þá vas efter; ok vilde reisa canoca-setr í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a468.11>Þyckva-b&oeacute;. En þat mál vas vant at semja í fyrsta sinne; ok <anchor id=a468.12>leitaðe hann af því þat fyrst til at fá, es vandazt vas: mannenn <anchor id=a468.13>þann es regolo mætte setja, þá es þeir menn skyldo hafa es þar <anchor id=a468.14>vildo til hrein-lífis ráðasc. Hann fór þá í Kirkjo-b&oeacute;, ok skoraðe <anchor id=a468.15>á Þorlák at hann réðesc til; en hann let þat ecke all-torsótt við<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a468.16>sik vera, af þvi at hann hafðe þat áðr í hog ser haft, at hafna <anchor id=a468.17>heime, ok ráðasc under regulo, efter orðom Almáttegs Goðs, es <anchor id=a468.18>hann kallar &oelig;ngan at fullo mega vesa sínn læri-svein, nema hann <anchor id=a468.19>láte alla sína eign fyrer Goðs saker, ok þióne hónom þá síðan með <anchor id=a468.20>hreinom hog. En þó leitaðe hann þá efter við Biarn-heðin prest,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a468.21>hverso hónom mætte þat í skap falla, eðr hve ráðlegt hónom sýndesc <anchor id=a468.22>at hann iáttaðesc under þann vanda es hann vas beiddr. En <anchor id=a469.1><pb id=pb469 n=469><note place=margin>[96: 7.]</note>Biarn-heðinn sagðe svá, at hónom m&oelig;nde sá dagr mikell þickja es <anchor id=a469.2>Þorlákr réðesc or Kirkjo-b&oeacute; at vista-fare; en þó lézc hann eige <anchor id=a469.3>þess nenna miok at letja, es hann sá margra manna hi&aolig;lp við <anchor id=a469.4>liggja. Vas þá síðan staðr settr í Þyckva-b&oeacute;, at ráðe ok for-sió <anchor id=a469.5>Kl&oeacute;ngs byscops ok allra héraðs-manna; ok síðan rézc Þorlákr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a469.6>þangat, ok vas þar þá sett canoca-setr.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a469.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En þann dag es Þorlákr fór al-fare or Kirkjo-b&oeacute;, þá leidde <anchor id=a469.8>alþýða manna hann or garðe, ok þótte &aolig;llom miket fyrer at skil&shy;jasc <anchor id=a469.9>við hann. En es Biarn-heðinn kom heim, geck hann í <anchor id=a469.10>skála, ok sá<note place=apparatus id=an469.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>geck hann í skála, ok sá]</ab> B; þá sá hann, Cd.</note> í rúm Þorláks ok mælte með aloga miklom: sagðe<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a469.11>þar þat rúm vesa, es alldregi munde síðan iam-vel vesa skipat, ef <anchor id=a469.12>hann skipaðe eige sialfr. Vas sú ok Þorláks umb-r&oeacute;ða alla æve <anchor id=a469.13>síðan, es bæðe vas í gæfa staðnom ok þeim es fyrer réðo, at hann <anchor id=a469.14>hefðe aldregi síno ráðe iam-vel unat sem þá sex vetr es hann vas í <anchor id=a469.15>Kirkjo-b&oeacute;; ok hefer m&aolig;rg stór virðing til þess staðar lagezc<note place=apparatus id=an469.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> lagzt, Cd.</note>; ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a469.16>vas siá mikel; af þvi at þat má <hi>g</hi>líklegt þickja, at þar mone bazt at <anchor id=a469.17>flesto veret hafa es hann unðe ser bazt.

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a469.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þá vas Þorlákr vel half-fert&oelig;gr es hann rézc í Ver; ok vas <anchor id=a469.19>þar vij vetr. Canoca-vígslo tók hann fyrst, ok vas þá í fyrsto prior <anchor id=a469.20>settr yfer þá canoca es þar vóro; ok samðe hann þegar svá fagr&shy;lega<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a469.21>þeirra líf, at á því lék þá orð vitra manna, at þeir hefðe hverge <anchor id=a469.22>iam-góða siðo séna, þar es eige hafðe lengr regolo líf saman veret <anchor id=a469.23>an þar.

<pb id=pb470 n=470><note place=margin>[96: 8.]</note>

<p n=6.4><anchor id=a470.1><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En efter þat vígðe Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop Þorlák til ábóta í Vere; ok <anchor id=a470.2>tók hann þá af nýjo merkilega stiórn at hafa yfer þeim br&oeacute;ðrom es <anchor id=a470.3>hann vas yfer settr. Hann bauð þeim at halda ástúð ok sam-þycke <anchor id=a470.4>sín á miðle, ok tiáðe þat fyrer þeim, hve miket í keyptesc, es sonr <anchor id=a470.5>Goðs seger svá: at &lsquo;hvar sem saman samnasc tveir eðr þrír<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a470.6>í Hans nafne, at Hann monde þeirra á miðlom vesa.&rsquo; Vas hann um <anchor id=a470.7>allt enn sið-vandazte fyrer þeirra h&aolig;nd, enda<note place=apparatus id=an470.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>enda]</ab> en, Cd.</note> vas þeim hvers-vitna <anchor id=a470.8>vel fengit.

<p n=6.5><anchor id=a470.9><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Halla, móðer Þorláks, var með hónom alla æve, meðan hon <anchor id=a470.10>lifðe: en hann hafðe fenget fé systrom sínom b&aoacute;ðom áðr hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a470.11>réðesc under regolo-haldet. Vas hann ástsamr &aolig;llom sínom frændom <anchor id=a470.12>þá sem áðr: en andlegr faðer &aolig;llom þeim es hann vas yfer <anchor id=a470.13>skipaðr. Hann bannaðe br&oeacute;ðrom fl&aolig;kr ok farar allar þær es eige <anchor id=a470.14>bar nauðsyn til; en bauð þeim at þeir skyldo sem iamn-lyndzter <anchor id=a470.15>vesa at góðom hlutom í sínne þiónosto, efter því sem Póll Postole<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a470.16>hefer kennt í sínom Pistle: &lsquo;Biðesc ér fyrer,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;án <anchor id=a470.17>afláte, ok g&oelig;ret Goðe þacker í &aolig;llom hlutom.&rsquo; Seger svá ok sialfr <anchor id=a470.18>Goðs Sonr, at &lsquo;Sá hverr es holpenn es hann staðfestesc í góðo <anchor id=a470.19>verke til enda lífs síns.&rsquo; Bauð hann þeim vandlega þ&aolig;gn at halda <anchor id=a470.20>þá es þat vas skylt; en hafa góða munnz-h&aolig;fn<note place=apparatus id=an470.2><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> munzsofn, Cd.</note> þá es málet vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a470.21>leyft. En at orðom Póls Postola, &lsquo;Spilla íll m&aoacute;l,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;góðom <anchor id=a470.22>siðom,&rsquo; Má þat ok siá, hve skylt vesa mun í því lífe at halda sik <anchor id=a470.23>frá heimlegom ok íllom orðom, ef þó skal rangt þó <hi>at</hi> gótt sé <anchor id=a471.1><pb id=pb471 n=471><note place=margin>[97 : 8.]</note>mælt, þá es skylt es at þegja, sem Davið seger í Psaltara: &lsquo;Lítilátr <anchor id=a471.2>em-ek,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;ok þagða-ek yfer góðom hlutom.&rsquo; Því <anchor id=a471.3>þóttesc hann lítilátr, at hann vas iamnan fúsare at mæla gótt an <anchor id=a471.4>íllt, ok batzc hann þó oft hvárs-tveggja fyrer Goðs sakar.

<p n=6.6><anchor id=a471.5><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Menn fóro til Canoca-setrs Þorláks or &aolig;ðrom munk-lífom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a471.6>eðr reglo-st&aolig;ðom, bæðe samlender ok útlender, at siá þar ok nema <anchor id=a471.7>góða siðo; ok bar þat hverr frá es þaðan fór, at hverge hefðe þess <anchor id=a471.8>komet, at þat líf þ&oeacute;tte iam-fagrlega lifat sem þar es Þorlákr hafðe <anchor id=a471.9>fyrer sét. Þá et fyrsta fundo þat marger menn, at þar vas til mikels <anchor id=a471.10>góðs at siá es hann vas, fyrer g&oeacute;zko saker, þess es aðrer h&aolig;fðo<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a471.11>eige f&aolig;ng á því-líkt af ser at miðla. Marger gengo þeir heiler af <anchor id=a471.12>hans funde þá es hann veitte þeim blezan ok yfer-s&oelig;ngva, es með <anchor id=a471.13>ymsom meinom kómo á hans fund.

<p n=6.7><anchor id=a471.14><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Mart bar þat annat hónom til handa es marger virðo þá þegar <anchor id=a471.15>til iartegna. Sá at-burðr varð,...<note place=apparatus id=an471.1><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> the name of the place is missing; ... þar á bæ sem hann var staddr, B.</note> þá es hann vas þar staddr, at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a471.16>eldr kom í hús; en þá es hann Þorlákr kom til ok blezaðe, þá <anchor id=a471.17>slocknaðe eldrenn. Ef fénaðr sýktesc þá batnaðe ofallt við hans <anchor id=a471.18>yfer-s&oelig;ngva, ef lífs vas auðet. Vatz-vígslor hans vóro merkilegar, <anchor id=a471.19>svát b&aolig;ðe feck bót af menn ok fénaðr. Ef vatne því vas dreift <anchor id=a471.20>yfer fénað es Þorlákr hafðe vígt, þá grandaðe því nálega hvártke<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a471.21>sótter né veðr, eða dýr. Ef mýss g&oeacute;rðo mein á mat eða klæðom, <anchor id=a472.1><pb id=pb472 n=472><note place=margin>[98: 9.]</note>þá kom fall í þær, eða hurfo allar af vatneno, ef því vas yfer st&oelig;kt, <anchor id=a472.2>ok f&oeacute;re þeir svá með &aolig;llo sem hann lagðe ráð til. Fór vatneð þá <anchor id=a472.3>þegar um &aolig;ll ná-læg heroð, en um allt Ísland síðan es Þorlákr varð <anchor id=a472.4>byscop; af þvi at menn þóttosc hver-vitna bót á finna um þat sem <anchor id=a472.5>þá bar mesta nauðsyn til. En þó fóro vitrer menn varlega með<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a472.6>þeirre umb-r&oeacute;ðo, at kalla þat berar iartegner, eða þýða þat einkan&shy;lega <anchor id=a472.7>hans heilagleik. Þvi at svá mæler Heil&aolig;g Ritning: &lsquo;Eige <anchor id=a472.8>skaltú lofa mann í lífe síno; lofa hann efter lífet, ok mikla hann <anchor id=a472.9>efter &aolig;mbon lífsens.&rsquo; Ok es þat af því mælt, at þat má g&oelig;rasc at <anchor id=a472.10>ábyrgð, bæðe þeim es þat mæla fyr an lok ævennar ero vitoð<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a472.11>til fullz; ok þat kann ok vesa, at þess hog sialfs locke sú umb-r&oeacute;ða <anchor id=a472.12>til nockors metnaðar: ok má nú þat siá hverso því es ráðet es menn <anchor id=a472.13>hafa þeim heil-ræðom fylgt í þesso mále, at fáer lofoðo hann of <anchor id=a472.14>miok í lífeno. En leiteð nú at lofa ok dýrka hann á allar lunder <anchor id=a472.15>sem f&aolig;ng ero á, ok ér vitoð dýrð hans ok heilagleik.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=7.1><anchor id=a472.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Sem ráð ok líf ens heilaga Þorláks skein með slíkom <anchor id=a472.17>blóma síns reinlífis ok g&oeacute;zko, ok fagrlegrar forsiá <anchor id=a472.18>annarra ráðs sem nú vas frá sagt: þá lét Almáttegr Goð til þess <anchor id=a472.19>rýma sem hann hafðe áðr firer hogat, at hans vegr skylde magnasc <anchor id=a472.20>ok vaxa or því sem þá vas. En þat varð með þeim hætte, at&mdash;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a472.21><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þá es Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop g&oelig;rðesc miok aldre orpenn, þá tók <anchor id=a472.22>hann van-heilso mikla; opnoðosc f&oeacute;tr hans, ok g&oelig;rðesc hann þá <anchor id=a473.1><pb id=pb473 n=473><note place=margin>[98: 9.]</note>miok van-f&oeacute;rr til síns embættess fyrir van-heilso saker. En hann <anchor id=a473.2>hafðe þá leyfe þeget af Eysteine erki-byscope til þess at maðr være <anchor id=a473.3>til byscops k&oelig;renn<note place=apparatus id=an473.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>k&oelig;renn]</ab> B; kosenn, Cd.   þá til Alþ.] til Alþ. þá, Cd.</note> efter hann: fór Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop þá til Alþingess, <anchor id=a473.4>ok sótte at vine sína, at maðr yrðe ráðenn til útan-ferðar; ok vóro <anchor id=a473.5>þá lagðar stefnor til. Þat sama sumar fór til Alþingess, svá sem<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a473.6>sendr af Goðe, Þorlákr ábóte, fyrer þær saker es hónom þótte <anchor id=a473.7>nauðsyn til bera; af þvi at hann vas alldregi vanr heiman at fara <anchor id=a473.8>nauðsynjalaust. Þá es umb-r&oeacute;ða tóksc um þetta mál þá vóro þrír <anchor id=a473.9>menn under kosning nefnder, þeir es bazt þótto til fallner af &aolig;llom; <anchor id=a473.10>ok vas einn af þeim Þorlákr ábóte; annarr ábóte hét Ogmundr, enn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a473.11>meste sk&aolig;rungr; (enn) þriðe vas prestr es Póll hét, lærdóms-maðr <anchor id=a473.12>mikell ok enn meste bú-þegn. Bar þat fagrt vitne hverjom þeirra, <anchor id=a473.13>at þess fýstesc hverr mest es kunnaztr vas. En þess kende at um <anchor id=a473.14>Þorlák, at hann hafðe sik eige miok upp hafið í metnaðe þeim <anchor id=a473.15>es sialf-virðing heiter; ok hrósaðe hann meirr góð-g&oelig;rningom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a473.16>sínom í Goðs auglite an manna; ok kost-gæfðe hann enn meirr at <anchor id=a473.17>vesa af-bragð annarra manna í sínne g&oeacute;zko, an sýnasc svá fyre <anchor id=a473.18>augom skyn-lítilla manna. Ok varð svá af því, at m&aolig;rgom þótte <anchor id=a473.19>ser hann ú-kunnastr þeirra es þá vóro í vale: ok vas þat af því <anchor id=a473.20>várkunnlegt, at hann hafðe m&aolig;rgom m&aolig;nnom vereð eige all-nálægr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a473.21>at héraða-vistom ok heimile. Þorlákr vas fá-málogr á þeim funde; <anchor id=a473.22>en marger vóro aðrer fiol-orðer þeir es þesse stór-mæle horfðo <anchor id=a474.1><pb id=pb474 n=474><note place=margin>[99: 9.]</note>miðr til handa an hónom. Vas þá efter leitað við Þorkel Geira <anchor id=a474.2>son es reyndr vas at rétt-yrðe, en kunnast Þorláks ráð af vitrom <anchor id=a474.3>m&aolig;nnom ok g&aolig;fgom, hverr sk&aolig;rungr Þorlákr være, eðr hvé mikell <anchor id=a474.4>orða-maðr hann være. En Þorkell svaraðe: &lsquo;Meirr kost-gæfer <anchor id=a474.5>Þorlákr,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;at g&oelig;ra allt sem bazt, an mæla sem flest.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a474.6>Þau sv&aolig;r fello m&aolig;nnom vel í skap, ok l&aolig;gðo marger þá þegar <anchor id=a474.7>meira ástar-hog til Þorláks, es þeir heyrðo svá virðoligan vitnis-burð <anchor id=a474.8>hans hátta af svá vitrom manne ok vel stiltom. Urðo þau <anchor id=a474.9>mála-lok, at kosningr vas lagðr under Kl&oeacute;ng byscop, at hann skylde <anchor id=a474.10>kiósa af þeim es í vale vóro. En hann kaus Þorlák til útan-ferðar,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a474.11>ok at taka byscops vígslo efter sik, ok þann vanda allan es því fylgðe.

<p><anchor id=a474.12>Petrs-messo dag k&oelig;re Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop Þorlák til byscops, ok <anchor id=a474.13>vilde þá þegar selja hónom í hendr &aolig;ll staðar-forr&aoacute;ð. En es <anchor id=a474.14>þesse kosningr vas fallenn til ens sæla Þorláks ábóta, þá sagðe <anchor id=a474.15>hann ser þat miok á óvart koma, ok kvazc fyrer því eige hafa<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a474.16>undan genget at vesa í þeim kosninge, at þá telðesc aðrer síðr <anchor id=a474.17>undan, þeir es hann kallaðe bazt til fallna. Talðesc hann miok <anchor id=a474.18>undan ok sagðesc ecke vesa til fallenn þessa vanda ok tignar. En <anchor id=a474.19>þó mátte hann eige móte mæla kost-g&oelig;fð ok ákefð alþýðonnar, <anchor id=a474.20>allra hellzt es hann grunaðe þat þá þegar, sem síðar bar raun á, at<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a474.21>þat vas Goðs vile; ok því samþycte hann um síðer þessom <anchor id=a474.22>kosninge.<note place=apparatus id=an474.1><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Petrs-messo dag ... um síðer þ. kosninge]</ab> add. B; om. A.</note>

<p n=7.3><anchor id=a474.23><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Herra Þorlákr ábóte fór af þinge aftr í canoka-setr sítt, en <anchor id=a475.1><pb id=pb475 n=475><note place=margin>[99 : 10.]</note>bað Kl&oeacute;ng byscop, at hann skylde hafa forr&aoacute;ð stóls ok staðar þau <anchor id=a475.2>missere. En þá g&oelig;rðosc fiár-hager ó-h&oeacute;ger í Scála-holte; urðo <anchor id=a475.3>af-vinnor miklar, en till&aolig;g lítil; var byscop<note place=apparatus id=an475.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>byscop]</ab> hann, Cd.</note> eige f&oeacute;rr til yfer-farar, <anchor id=a475.4>ok tókosc af allar giafar; ok mátte þá eige lengr<note place=apparatus id=an475.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lengr]</ab> lengi, Cd.</note> svá framm flytjasc <anchor id=a475.5>&aolig;ll missere at eige þyrfte þá stórra við-fanga<note place=apparatus id=an475.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>við-f.]</ab> til fanga, B.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=7.4><anchor id=a475.6><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Efter Iól vóro menn sender or Scála-holte efter byscops-efne; <anchor id=a475.7>ok fór hann austan á Langa-f&aolig;sto; ok með hónom Ioan Loftz <anchor id=a475.8>son, es þá vas mestr h&aolig;fðinge á Íslande; ok kómo þeir til staðarens <anchor id=a475.9>í Scála-holt h&aolig;lfom mánaðe fyre Pascer, ok vas þar Giz&oelig;rr Hallz <anchor id=a475.10>son fyrer. Þar vóro ok aðrer menn þeir es byscops viner vóro ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a475.11>forsiá-menn héraðsens vóro. Tók þá Þorlákr við forr&aoacute;ðom staðarens; <anchor id=a475.12>ok vas þá þegar mikel skuld g&oelig;r til þeirra nauðsynja es <anchor id=a475.13>búet þurfte at hafa. Hann hafðe þá þegar mikla skap-raun, bæðe <anchor id=a475.14>af viðr-vist manna ok &aolig;ðrom ó-h&oeacute;gendom þeim es hann átte um <anchor id=a475.15>at vesa, ok bar hann þær allar þolin-móðlega.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a475.16><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop lá í reckjo með lítlom mætte, ok Þorlákr vas <anchor id=a475.17>þá í Scála-holte, af þvi at menn vildo eige at hann f&oeacute;re útan fyr <anchor id=a475.18>sakar ófriðar þess es þá vas miðlim Noregs ok Íslannz, es m&aoacute;lom <anchor id=a475.19>vas ó-sett, þeim es g&oelig;rzc (h&aolig;fðo) landa í miðlom af vígom ok feár-upp-tektom; <anchor id=a475.20>ok dvalðe hann þat um nockorra vetra saker. En es<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a475.21>Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop andaðesc, ok at því kom at hónom þótte nauðsyn <anchor id=a476.1><pb id=pb476 n=476><note place=margin>[100: 11.]</note>til, at eige være lengr byscops-laust í Scála-holte an þá hafðe veret, <anchor id=a476.2>þá lét hann eige lengr letjasc útan-ferðar. Kom þat fyrer ecke <anchor id=a476.3>þótt hann være lattr útan-ferðar fyrer ófriðar saker. Hann tók til <anchor id=a476.4>orða Póls Postola: &lsquo;Eige skoloð ér skelfasc við ótta vándra manna,&rsquo; <anchor id=a476.5>sagðe hann. Vas hann þá síðan útan til búenn, ok vilde hann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a476.6>bæðe hafa líteð fé, at því sem aðrer hafa haft, ok eige miket f&aolig;ro-neyte; <anchor id=a476.7>ok greiddesc vel um hans ferð, unz þeir kómo viðr Noreg.

<p n=8.1><anchor id=a476.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Þá es Þorlákr <hi lang=la>electus</hi> kom á fund<note place=apparatus id=an476.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fund]</ab> here begins <hi>a</hi>, first leaf.</note> Eysteins erki-byscops, <anchor id=a476.9>þá tók hann við hónom forkunnar-vel; ok let hann <anchor id=a476.10>þat brátt vitað verða, at hann vilde allt leggja þat blíðlega til af<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a476.11>sinne hende es hann þóttesc skyldr til; en hann vilde hónom eige <anchor id=a476.12>ellegar byscops tign gefa nema samþycke konungs være til. Þeir <anchor id=a476.13>h&aolig;fðo þá ríke yfer Norege feðgar, Magnus konungr ok Erlingr iarl <anchor id=a476.14>faðer hans; ok tóko þeir þunglega &aolig;llo Þorláks mále; ok kvómo <anchor id=a476.15>þaðan hót fyrer h&oeacute;gende, at hvártge munde ó-hætt fé né m&aolig;nnom.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a476.16>En Þorlákr lét ser líteð um þat finnasc; ok sýnde þar sínn aloga <anchor id=a476.17>vesa allan sem Davíð kenner í Psaltara, at &lsquo;Betra sé Goðe at <anchor id=a476.18>treystasc an h&aolig;fðingjom,&rsquo; ok lét hann þetta af því hiá ser líða. En <anchor id=a476.19>erki-byscop þóttesc sitja í miklom vanda, es hann vilde hvára-tveggja <anchor id=a476.20>elska; ok vilde hann þess gæta es Petar<note place=apparatus id=an476.2><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Petar]</ab> emend.; Pall, A, B.</note> Postole kenner í sínom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a476.21>Pistola: &lsquo;Óttesc ér Goð,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;en vegsameð konung.&rsquo; <anchor id=a477.1><pb id=pb477 n=477><note place=margin>[101: 11.]</note>Mátte þat ok á &aolig;llo siá, at hann vilde her hvárs-tveggja vandlega <anchor id=a477.2>gæta í þeirra mále. Bar erki-byscop þá boð á miðlom þeirra, ok <anchor id=a477.3>aðrer góð-giarner menn; ok kom þar, at konungrenn ok iarlenn <anchor id=a477.4>sam-þykðo því, at Þorlákr t&oeacute;ke byscops-vígslo; ok g&oelig;rðesc þá <anchor id=a477.5>vinganar-svipr þeirra á miðle, ok g&aoacute;fosc þeir gi&aolig;fom áðr þeir<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a477.6>skilðe. Ok hafðe Sverrer konongr þat oft uppe, es bæðe vas <anchor id=a477.7>merkr í mále ok spakr at mann-vite, at þeim feðgom hefðe þá <anchor id=a477.8>aller hluter léttazt genget es þeirra vas vingan á miðle, ok Þorlákr <anchor id=a477.9>vas þar í lande, bæðe í sóknom ok nálega vel-flest annat.

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a477.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þá vas Þorlákr vígðr til byscops af Eysteine erki-byscope á<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a477.11>d&aolig;gom Alexandri Pava, þrimr<note place=apparatus id=an477.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þrimr]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; þrem, A. ok Póls] add. B.</note> nóttom efter píningar-dag Petrs ok <anchor id=a477.12>Póls Postola. Við þá vígslo vas Eirekr Stafangrs byscop, es síðan <anchor id=a477.13>vas erki-byscop í Þróndheime efter Eystein erki-byscop: enn þriðe <anchor id=a477.14>vas við vígslo Þorláks byscops Póll Bi&aolig;rgynjar byscop, mikell <anchor id=a477.15>sk&aolig;rungr ok vinr Þorláks byscops alla æve síðan: Þorlákr byscop<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a477.16>vas skamma stund hiá erki-byscope síðan es<note place=apparatus id=an477.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es]</ab> add. <hi>a</hi>.</note> hann hafðe vígslo <anchor id=a477.17>þeget, af þvi at hann visse g&oelig;rst hve títt vesa mátte<note place=apparatus id=an477.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hve títt v. m.]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; hve skiótt þurfte, A.</note> til-kv&aoacute;mo hans <anchor id=a477.18>til Íslannz ok þeirra sauða es hann vas yfer skipaðr<note place=apparatus id=an477.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>skipaðr]</ab> Sama sumar fór hann til Íslanz með virðolegom gi&aolig;fom erkibyscops, ok hann hafðe út með ser gler-glugg þann sem enge vas áðr iam-góðr fyrir í Scála-hollte, add. B.&mdash;<foreign lang=en-UK>And the same summer he went to Iceland, having got worshipful gifts of the archbishop, and took out with him a glass window fairer than any that had been aforetime in Scal-holt.</foreign></note>.

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a477.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En es Þorlákr vas skil<hi>i</hi>ðr at sam-visto<hi>m</hi> við erki-byscop, en <anchor id=a477.20>þeir vóro efter aðrer með erki-byscope<note place=apparatus id=an477.5><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en þeir v.... byscope]</ab> add. <hi>a</hi>.</note>, þá spurðo þeir byscoparner<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a478.1><pb id=pb478 n=478><note place=margin>[101, 392: 12.]</note>hverso hónom hefðe þockasc Þorlákr byscop. Hann sagðe svá, at <anchor id=a478.2>hann þóttesc enge<note place=apparatus id=an478.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>enge]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; engan, Cd. þann ... hafa] <hi>a</hi>; þann hafa vígt, Cd.</note> byscop þann vígðan hafa, es hónom þótte iam-g&oelig;rla <anchor id=a478.3>með ser hafa alla þá mann-koste, es byscopom es skylt at <anchor id=a478.4>hafa; sem Póll Postola seger í Pistola<note place=apparatus id=an478.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Pistola]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; pistle, Cd.</note> sínom þeim es hann sende <anchor id=a478.5>Tito: &lsquo;Byscop h&oeacute;fer at sé,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;last-varr ok lærðr vel;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a478.6>dramblauss ok dryckjo-maðr lítell; &oelig;rr ok ó-ágiarn; skýrr ok skap-góðr; <anchor id=a478.7>góð-giarn ok gest-risenn; réttlátr ok ráð-vandr; hrein-lífr <anchor id=a478.8>ok hag-ráðr; tryggr ok trú-fastr; mildr ok mál-diarfr; ástsamr <anchor id=a478.9>við alþýðo en ávítsamr við ó-r&oeacute;kna.&rsquo; Ok má siá, at þat es <anchor id=a478.10>heilags mannz, at vesa með þeim hætte. &lsquo;Má-ek yðr svá n&oelig;cqve<note place=apparatus id=an478.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>n&oelig;cqve]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; nockot, Cd.</note><ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a478.11>segja helzt hve vitrleger mer hafa virzc hans hætter,&rsquo; sagðe erki-byscop, <anchor id=a478.12>&lsquo;at ek m&oelig;nda þvílíkt kiósa mítt lífs d&oeacute;gr et &oelig;fsta sem <anchor id=a478.13>ek sá<note place=apparatus id=an478.4><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sá]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; sé, Cd.</note> hans hvert.&rsquo; Ok má nú þat siá, hve vitr ok gl&oelig;gg-sýnn hann <anchor id=a478.14>hefer vereð um ráð ens sæla Þorláks byscops.

<p n=8.4><anchor id=a478.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Byscop Þorlákr réðz þá til skips með sítt f&aolig;ro-neyte. Ok þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a478.16>es þeir vóro nálega búner, þá hlóðo stýre-menn skipet til ó-f&oeacute;rs af <anchor id=a478.17>lausa-viðom, ok tveim skipom þeim es þeir tengðo útan við vígen. <anchor id=a478.18>Þá geck byscop á land upp af skipeno, ok sagðe stýre-m&aolig;nnom, at <anchor id=a478.19>hónom þótte of miok hlaðet vesa. Þá svaraðe einn þeirra&mdash;sá hét <anchor id=a478.20>Macan&mdash;&lsquo;Þú átt ecke vetta í skipeno,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;enda skallt-þú<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a478.21>ecke ráða hverso hlaða skal.&rsquo; Byscop svaraðe: &lsquo;Ek fyr-býð<note place=apparatus id=an478.5><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> ferbyð, <hi>a</hi>.</note> yðr í <anchor id=a478.22>Goðs nafne,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;at hlaða til ú-f&oeacute;rs; en ek fel yðr á hende <anchor id=a478.23>allra manna ábyrgð þeirra es með yðr fara.&rsquo; Steig þá síðan <anchor id=a479.1><pb id=pb479 n=479><note place=margin>[102: 12.]</note>byscop á skip; ok léto þeir þá við svá-búet í haf. Ok es þeir<note place=apparatus id=an479.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ok es þeir]</ab> here ends the first leaf of <hi>a</hi>, the rest to the end of the § is taken from B.</note> kómo <anchor id=a479.2>miok at Íslande, þá g&oelig;rðe á stór-viðre, ok fengo þeir á-f&aolig;ll mikel; <anchor id=a479.3>geck í sundr drag-reipet, ok rak útan-borðz seglet. Vildo þá aller <anchor id=a479.4>heita; en Þorlákr byscop kvazc eige skyldo heita nema kastað <anchor id=a479.5>være. En es kastað vas því sem byscop vilde, þá féll þegar veðret,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a479.6>ok tóko land næsta dag efter; ok kom Þorlákr byscop heim í <anchor id=a479.7>Scála-holt næsta dag<note place=apparatus id=an479.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>næsta dag]</ab> A; B omits &lsquo;næsta dag.&rsquo;</note> fyrer Laurentius messo<note place=apparatus id=an479.3>messo] this § 4 is taken from <hi>a</hi> and B. Sem sumraðe rézk Þ. í skip ok lét í haf með sítt foro-neyti, ok varð vel reið-fara, ok tóko þeir þar hofn sem þeir mundu kiósa, ok kom byscop heim í Sk. næsta dag f. Laur. messo, A.</note>.

<p n=9.1><anchor id=a479.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Menn urðo stórlega fegner hans til-kv&aoacute;mo; ok tók <anchor id=a479.9>hann þá þegar at hafa stillilega stiórn á þeim hlutom, <anchor id=a479.10>es til hans kvómo með r&oelig;ksamlegre ráðvende. Hann hélt þó<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a479.11>nálega í &aolig;llo canoca-reglo því es hann mátte við koma, þá es hann <anchor id=a479.12>vas byscop orðenn, bæðe í klæða-búnaðe, í v&aolig;kom, ok f&aolig;stom, ok <anchor id=a479.13>í b&oeacute;na-halde. Hann tók at semja þá af nýjo heima-manna siðo <anchor id=a479.14>ok hýbýla h&aoacute;tto, þá es þar héldosc um hans daga vel í m&aolig;rgo <anchor id=a479.15>lage.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a479.16><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þorlákr byscop lagðe mesta &aoacute;st ok elsko á presta þá ok <anchor id=a479.17>kenne-menn es siðlátlega lifðo, ok sínar vígslor varð-veitto n&oelig;ckot <anchor id=a479.18>efter á-kveðno; ok virðe þá alla s&oeacute;melega, ok sette þá sællega, at <anchor id=a479.19>því sem f&aolig;ng vóro á. En þá lærða menn es miðr gætto siðlætis, <anchor id=a479.20>ok sínar vígslor varð-veitto óvarlegar, minte hann á með blíðlegom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a479.21>boðorðom betr at g&oelig;ra, ok snúa síno ráðe áleiðiss ok annarra, <anchor id=a480.1><pb id=pb480 n=480><note place=margin>[102, 277: 12.]</note>þeirra es þeir &aoacute;tto at á-byrgjasc. En þá es eige skipoðosc við <anchor id=a480.2>miúkar áminningar, ávítaðe hann með stillilegom stríð-mælom ok <anchor id=a480.3>hógværom hirtingom, svá sem Póll Postole kende Timotheo: <anchor id=a480.4>&lsquo;Vara skaltú, ok biðja, ok ávíta með allre þolinm&oeacute;ðe ok <anchor id=a480.5>læringo.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=9.3><anchor id=a480.6><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hann hugðe vandlega fyrer staðar eign, ok sette þá<note place=apparatus id=an480.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá]</ab> thus?</note> menn <anchor id=a480.7>ofallt firer til fiár-forráða, es hann mætte friálsaztr vesa sialfr frá <anchor id=a480.8>þeirre &aolig;nn; en þó dr&oeacute;gesc framm fiár-hlutr staðarens efter því <anchor id=a480.9>sem f&aolig;ng være á, þess es þó være til allz haft þess es hafa þurfte. <anchor id=a480.10>En svá hafðe hann vitrlega stilling á um fiár-hage, at aller menn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a480.11>vitrer h&aolig;fðo þá þegar á mále hve gótt um-stille hann þótte um alla <anchor id=a480.12>hlute hafa.

<p n=9.4><anchor id=a480.13><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En svá mikla stund sem hann lagðe á um þá til-skipan es til <anchor id=a480.14>auðræða kom, at þat f&oeacute;re allt at b&aolig;ztom h&aoacute;ttom, þá lagðe hann <anchor id=a480.15>á þat þó mestan hog, es til kirkjonnar kom, ok (at) kenne-m&aolig;nnom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a480.16>være allra hluta sem bazt fenget. Þat fylgðe ok þar með, at hann <anchor id=a480.17>vandaðe ok fyre kenne-m&aolig;nnom þiónosto-g&oelig;rð alla, ok kende <anchor id=a480.18>þeim ástsamlega allt embætte þat es þeir vóro skylder at fremja <anchor id=a480.19>með sínom vígslom.

<p n=9.5><anchor id=a480.20><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hann samðe ok skrifta-boð fyrer &aolig;llom kenne-m&aolig;nnom í<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a480.21>sínne byscops-sýslo, svá at aller buðo einn veg. Bauð hann ok <anchor id=a480.22>&aolig;llom m&aolig;nnom til skrifta at ganga á hverjom tolf m&aoacute;noðom um <anchor id=a480.23>sinn et sialdnazta; en &aolig;llom altaris-þiónom, ef þeir felle í h&aolig;foð-synðer, <anchor id=a481.1><pb id=pb481 n=481><note place=margin>[102: 12.]</note>bauð hann hvert sinn at iátta sik áðr þeir fremðe Goðs <anchor id=a481.2>þiónosto eðr messo-s&aolig;ng.<note place=apparatus id=an481.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hann samðe ... messo-s&aolig;ng]</ab> add. B (382), om. A.</note>

<p n=9.6><anchor id=a481.3><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Hann heimte saman lærða menn fyrer enar hæsto hátíðer <anchor id=a481.4>heima í Scála-holte, ok sagðe þá hvat hverr skylde at g&oelig;ra, <anchor id=a481.5>þess at allt yrðe fagrlega framet í Goðs auglite þat es þeir vóro<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a481.6>skylder til. En svá miok sem hann vandaðe fyrer &aolig;ðrom, þá <anchor id=a481.7>g&oelig;rðe hann sialfr allt bazt at, svá at nálega kunno þat aller <anchor id=a481.8>skilja frá &aolig;ðrom flestom lærðom m&aolig;nnom, hve ágætlega hann <anchor id=a481.9>framðe í Goðs auglite alla þiónosto, es ynðe vas í, á at siá ok <anchor id=a481.10>heyra til.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=9.7><anchor id=a481.11><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Þorlákr byscop kende opt kenningar; ok vas þat af því mikel <anchor id=a481.12>mann-raun, at hónom vas málet stirt ok ú-h&oeacute;gt; en svá vóro orðen <anchor id=a481.13>s&oeacute;t ok vel saman sett, at ofallt mátte þeim þat í hog koma es <anchor id=a481.14>hanns kenningom hlýddo, sem Davíð seger í Psaltera, at &lsquo;S&oeacute;tare <anchor id=a481.15>ero m&aoacute;l þín, Dróttenn, í kverkom,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;heldr an seimr ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a481.16>hunang í munne mínom.&rsquo; Þau en s&aolig;mo bar Þorlákr byscop framm <anchor id=a481.17>Goðs m&aoacute;l með svá f&aolig;grom d&oeacute;mom síns lífs, at þau m&aoacute;tto í <anchor id=a481.18>einskiss mannz lífe, hónom sam-tíða, iafn-dýrðleg finnasc.

<p n=9.8><anchor id=a481.19><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Þorlákr byscop vakðe l&aolig;ngom um nætr þá <hi>es</hi> aðrer svófo, ok <anchor id=a481.20>bazc fyrer r&oeacute;kelega, at hann skylde þat &oelig;ðlasc, es Goð mælte: &lsquo;Sæll<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a481.21>es sá þræll,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;es Dróttenn finnr vakanda þá es hann k&oelig;mr <anchor id=a481.22>at vitja hans,&rsquo; es þat ok á kveðet í Goðs boðorðom, es hann mæler <anchor id=a481.23>svá sialfr: &lsquo;Vakeð ér,&rsquo; seger hann, &lsquo;þvi at ér vitoð eige á hverre <anchor id=a481.24>tíð Dróttenn k&oelig;mr.&rsquo; Ok bar svá raun á, at Þorláke m&oelig;nde <anchor id=a482.1><pb id=pb482 n=482><note place=margin>[103: 13.]</note>þau orð<note place=apparatus id=an482.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þau orð]</ab> emend.; þær tíðer, Cd.</note> sialdan or hog ganga; af þvi at þat hefer hónom nú fram <anchor id=a482.2>komet sem Goð hét þeim es opt urðo funner í skynsamlegre v&aolig;ko, <anchor id=a482.3>at hann m&oelig;nde setja þá yfer alla góða hlute sína efter þetta líf.

<p n=9.9><anchor id=a482.4><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Heilagr Þorlákr byscop fastaðe miok þá es hann vas heima <anchor id=a482.5>at stóle sínom; ok mintesc hann á þat í því, es Dróttenn sagðe<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a482.6>sialfr í Goðspialle, at &lsquo;þat være sumt kyn fiánda<note place=apparatus id=an482.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> B; homoiotel. in A from fiánda to fiánda.</note> at eige mætte <anchor id=a482.7>sigra nema með f&aolig;sto ok b&oeacute;na-halde,&rsquo; ok lét hann þat því saman <anchor id=a482.8>fara í síno lífe, at hann vilde yfer-stíga alla fiánda freistne.

<p n=9.10><anchor id=a482.9><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> Hann huggaðe þá es áðr vóro hrygger ok tiáðe þat fyrer <anchor id=a482.10>þeim, es Dróttenn sialfr mælte: at, &lsquo;Sé sæler es nú sýta, ok þeir<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a482.11>mono sialfer síðar huggasc,&rsquo; ok í &aolig;ðro Goðspialle; es hann mælte <anchor id=a482.12>við Postola sína: &lsquo;Hrygð yðor mon snúasc í fagnað,&rsquo; seger hann.

<p n=9.11><anchor id=a482.13><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> Þorlákr byscop ástundaðe með &aolig;llo kost-gæfe at sam-þyckja <anchor id=a482.14>þá ok sætta<note place=apparatus id=an482.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þ. b. ástundaðe ... sætta]</ab> according to B; Þ. b. samþyckti þá ok sætle, Cd.</note>, es áðr vóro reiðer ok sundr-þycker; ok sagðe þeim <anchor id=a482.15>þat sem sagt vas ok satt es, at reiðen már miok rétt-sýne manna<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a482.16>meðan hon fylger, sem Iacob<note place=apparatus id=an482.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Iacob]</ab> emend.; Poll, Cd. (James i. 20).</note> Postole seger: at &lsquo;eige vinnr<note place=apparatus id=an482.5><ab type=textRef>vinnr]</ab> B; at eigi á saman v. G. ok r. m., Cd.</note> <anchor id=a482.17>réttlæte Goðs reiðe mannzens.&rsquo; Ok í &aolig;ðrom stað: &lsquo;Sigrastú eige <anchor id=a482.18>af íllo, heldr sigraðú íllt með góðo:&rsquo; þat es at sigra reiðena með <anchor id=a482.19>þolinm&oeacute;ðe ok g&oeacute;zko.

<p n=9.12><anchor id=a482.20><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Þorlákr byscop sá oft á helgar b&oeacute;cr, ok las yfer Helgar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a483.1><pb id=pb483 n=483><note place=margin>[104: 13.]</note>Ritningar; af þvi at hann gleymðe eige því es Ióan Postole mæler <anchor id=a483.2>í sínne bóc: &lsquo;Sæll es sá es les ok heyrer orð þessarar b&oeacute;cr, ok <anchor id=a483.3>varðveitir þá hlute es á henne ero ritaðer.&rsquo; Hann kende oft clercom <anchor id=a483.4>bæðe b&oeacute;cr at lesa, ok annat nám þat es þeim vas nytsamlegt; sá <anchor id=a483.5>hann hve mikel nauðsyn á vas gótt at kenna, sem Davíð seger í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a483.6>Psaltara: &lsquo;Komeð ér, syner, ok hlýðet mer, en ek man kenna yðr <anchor id=a483.7>hverso Goð skal óttasc&rsquo;

<p n=9.13><anchor id=a483.8><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> Iafnan vas hann at rite, ok ritaðe ofallt helgar b&oeacute;cr efter <anchor id=a483.9>d&oeacute;mom Póls Postola<note place=apparatus id=an483.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>pistola]</ab> so Cd. here.</note>, es hann sagðe í sínom pistola: &lsquo;Eige ritom <anchor id=a483.10>ver yðr aðra hlute an þá es yðr es mest þ&aolig;rf at lesa ok at vita.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=9.14><anchor id=a483.11><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> En hvat<hi>ki</hi> es Þorlákr byscop hafðesc at annat, þá vóro hans <anchor id=a483.12>varrar alldri<hi>ge</hi> kyrrar frá Goðs lofe ok b&oeacute;na-halde, þvi at hann hog-leidde <anchor id=a483.13>þat es Iacob Postole<note place=apparatus id=an483.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>pistola]</ab> thus Cd.</note> seger í sínom pistola, at &lsquo;miket má fyrer <anchor id=a483.14>Goðe sí-feld b&oeacute;n réttlátz mannz:&rsquo; hefer ok miket stoðat hans <anchor id=a483.15>b&oeacute;na-hald, bæðe hónom ok m&aolig;rgom &aolig;ðrom. Byscop vas linr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a483.16>ok miúkr í &aolig;llom atg&oelig;rðom<note place=apparatus id=an483.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>atg&oelig;rðom]</ab> góðom ráðom, Cd.</note>, ok heil-ráðr um allt, es hann vas at <anchor id=a483.17>sóttr; hefer hann þat nú ok &oelig;ðlasc, es Goð hefer heiteð þeim, es <anchor id=a483.18>þann veg være lynder, es hann mæler í Goðspialleno: &lsquo;Sæler &apos;ro <anchor id=a483.19>miúkláter, þvi at þeir mono &oelig;ðlasc eilífa i&aolig;rð lifande manna<note place=apparatus id=an483.4><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lifande manna]</ab> add. B.</note>.&rsquo;

<p n=9.15><anchor id=a483.20><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Þorlákr byscop s&oelig;ng hvern dag messo bæðe ser til hialpar<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a483.21>ok &aolig;ðrom, ok minntesc í sí-fello píningar Goðs sonar: ok hefer <anchor id=a484.1><pb id=pb484 n=484><note place=margin>[104: 13.]</note>hann nú því fagrlegre &aolig;mbon teket fyrer sína þiónosto-g&oelig;rð, sem <anchor id=a484.2>hann framðe oftarr þat embætte ok merkilegar an flester aðrer.

<p n=9.16><anchor id=a484.3><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> Hann lagðe mikla stund á at elska fát&oeacute;ka menn; klædde <anchor id=a484.4>hann kalna, en f&oeacute;dde hungraða; ok vas þat auð-sýnt, at hónom <anchor id=a484.5>geck þat sialdan er hog hvat fyr h&aolig;ndom es á Dóms-dege: hve<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a484.6>miok þat es kallat at á hirte ríðe<note place=apparatus id=an484.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hirte ríðe]</ab> thus Cd.</note> hverso til fát&oeacute;kra manna vas <anchor id=a484.7>g&oelig;rt í þesso lífe. Þat lagðe hann ok við um þat framm sem flester <anchor id=a484.8>góðer menn hafa g&oelig;rt áðr, at hann lét kalla saman fát&oeacute;ka menn <anchor id=a484.9>fyrer enar hærsto hátíðer, tolf, eðr nio, eðr siau, eða fimm<note place=apparatus id=an484.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eða fimm]</ab> (eða v.), add. B.</note>, ok kom <anchor id=a484.10>til leynelega at þvá f&oeacute;tr þeirra, ok þerrðe síðan með háre síno, ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a484.11>gaf hverjom þeirra n&oelig;ckora góða olmoso, áðr á braut f&oeacute;re; ok <anchor id=a484.12>g&oelig;rðe hann helldr svá at Goðs d&oeacute;mom an manna, es fyrr þó f&oeacute;tr <anchor id=a484.13>postola sínna, ok lét síðan pínasc til lausnar &aolig;llo mann-kyne; mælte <anchor id=a484.14>ok svá sonr Goðs, þá es hann hafðe þveget f&oeacute;tr postola sínna, <anchor id=a484.15>&lsquo;G&oelig;reð ér efter d&oeacute;mom mínom þeim sem nú g&oelig;rer ek við yðr.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a484.16>Lét af því enn sæle Þorlákr byscop fóta-þváttenn fara fyrer miskunnar <anchor id=a484.17>gi&aolig;fenne.

<p n=9.17><anchor id=a484.18><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> Eige m&aoacute;tto ok hans ást-viner ok trúnaðar-menn yfer því <anchor id=a484.19>þegja efter andlát hans, es þeir þóttosc g&oelig;rla vita, at hann hafðe <anchor id=a484.20>þá leynda hlute með ser í mein-lætom ok góð-gerningom es hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a484.21>trúðe &oelig;ngom til at vita; sem Goð býðr, at &lsquo;eige skole vita en <anchor id=a484.22>vinstre h&aolig;nd, hvat en h&oeacute;gre g&oelig;rer.&rsquo; Þórðo ok eige þat ást-viner <anchor id=a485.1><pb id=pb485 n=485><note place=margin>[105: 13.]</note>byscops síðan berara at g&oelig;ra, es hann vilde sialfr svá leynt vesa <anchor id=a485.2>láta.

<p n=10.1><anchor id=a485.3><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> Þorlákr byscop vas oft vanr at hafa r&oeacute;ðor við <anchor id=a485.4>góða menn ok sið-láta, ok kynna ser svá þeirra siðo, <anchor id=a485.5>ok styrkja þá í sínom heilræðom, at þeir mætte haldasc í sínne<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a485.6>g&oeacute;zko. Hann hélt ok mikenn v&aolig;rð á þeirra manna ráðe es [eige] <anchor id=a485.7>gætto sína gl&oeacute;pe<note place=apparatus id=an485.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> Emend.; es gættu sína glæpe, Cd.; er sín gætto eige vel sialfer, B.</note>, at leiða þá frá r&aolig;ngom girndom; ok kalla[ðe] <anchor id=a485.8>þá aftr til leiðrétto síns máls, þó <hi>at</hi> áðr hefðe eige vel til gæzc: <anchor id=a485.9>þvi at þat mælte Dróttenn: &lsquo;Eige vil-ek dauða synðogs mannz,&rsquo; <anchor id=a485.10>sagðe hann, &lsquo;heldr vil-ek at hann snúesc til mín ok life.&rsquo; Sýnde<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a485.11>þetta enn sæle Þorlákr byscop &aolig;llom þeim es iðrasc vildo sínna <anchor id=a485.12>and-marka; ok ef þeir vildo hans r&aoacute;ðom fylgja, varð hann þeim <anchor id=a485.13>fegenn, ok líknaðe þeim linlega með létt-bærom skriftom, efter því <anchor id=a485.14>sem sagðe Spámaðr Goðs, at &lsquo;á hverjo d&oeacute;gre es maðr vilde til <anchor id=a485.15>Goðs snúasc, at hann munde þá lifa góðo lífe, en deyja eige íllom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a485.16>dauða.&rsquo; En þá es eige vildo á-leiðis snúasc við hans blíðar umb-r&oeacute;ðor<note place=apparatus id=an485.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>umb-]</ab> thus A.</note>, <anchor id=a485.17>ok eige fyri-láta<note place=apparatus id=an485.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-láta]</ab> B; -líta, Cd.</note> sína van-hage við hans stríð-mæle, þá forboðaðe <anchor id=a485.18>hann suma, en bann-sette suma, efter því sem Christr bauð <anchor id=a485.19>lære-sveinom sínom: &lsquo;Hirta skoloð ér br&oeacute;ðr yðra ást-samlega; <anchor id=a485.20>en ef eige láta hirtasc, þá leiðesc ér þá sem aðra villo-menn eða<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a485.21>heiðingja.&rsquo; Hann bar þolen-móðlega mein-g&oelig;rðer manna, en harm&shy;aðe <anchor id=a485.22>miok van-hage manna; en sam-þykðesc alldre<hi>gi</hi> við sið-leysor <anchor id=a486.1><pb id=pb486 n=486><note place=margin>[106: 15.]</note>vándra manna; þvi at hann vas þess fúss at heyra þat es Goð mæler: <anchor id=a486.2>&lsquo;Sæler&apos;ro þolenmóðer, þvi at þeir mono kallasc Goðs syner.&rsquo; Hónom <anchor id=a486.3>þótte íll ó-hlýðne manna; fyrer þvi at hann grætto<note place=apparatus id=an486.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>grætto]</ab> emend.; grædde, Cd.; harmaðe, B.</note> andar-s&aoacute;r sínna <anchor id=a486.4>under-manna; svá sem Póle postola vas gefet við Goðs Cristne á <anchor id=a486.5>sínom d&aolig;gom, at &oelig;ngom manne vas þat til meins eðr angrs, at eige<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a486.6>þóttesc hann allra þeirra meina á ser kenna fyr ástar sakar við þá.

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a486.7><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Heilagr Þorlákr neytte svá þess stiórnar-veldess es hónom var <anchor id=a486.8>gefet í sínne vígslo, at binda ok leysa af Goðs h&aolig;lfo ráð manna, at <anchor id=a486.9>vitrom m&aolig;nnom ok rétt-l&aoacute;tom sýndesc iamnt hvárs-tveggja gætt <anchor id=a486.10>vesa, at þar fylgðe aldre<hi>gi</hi> &oeacute;singr né van-stille; enda vas hann ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a486.11>aldre<hi>gi</hi> í því svá sl&oeacute;r né linr, þó tor-sótt vere, at eige mætte þat <anchor id=a486.12>meirr meta til miúkleiks ok miskunnar, þó <hi>at</hi> hann biðe margra <anchor id=a486.13>lenge, ef rétt virðing vere á. Lét hann ser þat opt í hog koma <anchor id=a486.14>sem Davíð seger, at &lsquo;Dróttenn elskar miskunn ok rétt-læte, en gefr <anchor id=a486.15>af ser dýrð ok milde.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=10.3><anchor id=a486.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þess es ok at geta, es Þorlákr byscop elskaðe þann stað mest, <anchor id=a486.17>þegar es Scála-holt leið, es hann hafðe áðr prýddan með sínne at-vist. <anchor id=a486.18>Hann vígðe til ábóta í Vere Goðmund Bialfa son, góðan <anchor id=a486.19>mann ok réttlátan; mildan ok metnaðar-lausan. Þorkell Geira <anchor id=a486.20>son, es fyrr vas geteð í þesso mále, rézc þar under regulo-hald, ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a486.21>hélt vel meðan hann lifðe, ok andaðesc á eno nionda áre byscopsdóms <anchor id=a486.22>Þorláks byscops.

<pb id=pb487 n=487><note place=margin>[106: .16.]</note>

<p n=10.4><anchor id=a487.1><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Um daga Þorláks byscops vas í l&aolig;g leitt at halda heilagt Ambrosius-dag, <anchor id=a487.2>ok Ceciliu-dag, ok Agnesar-dag; ok at fasta nátt-f&aolig;stor <anchor id=a487.3>fyrr Postola-messor ok Nicholas-messo. Hann bauð ríkt <anchor id=a487.4>at halda Friádaga-f&aolig;sto, svá at &oelig;ngan skylde tví-mælt eta rúm-helgan, <anchor id=a487.5>nema þann einn es í Pásca-vico es. Hann hélt svá ríkt<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a487.6>sialfr Friá-daga, at hann át alldrige<note place=apparatus id=an487.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>alldrige]</ab> emend.; alla, Cd.</note> þurt, ef hann vas heill; en hann <anchor id=a487.7>vas svá linr ok h&oeacute;gr í því, þá es hann vas siúkr, at hann át hvítan <anchor id=a487.8>mat á Ymbro-d&aolig;gom ok Friá-daga, ef hann vas þess beðenn, ok <anchor id=a487.9>gaf þau d&oeacute;me þeim m&aolig;nnom, es nú vilja slíka hlute svá g&oelig;ra, <anchor id=a487.10>sem v&aoacute;n es at bazt same í Goðs auglite. Þorlákr byscop vas siúkr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a487.11>í sínom byscopsdóme, þá es Ióla-dag bar á Friá-dag; ok vas hann <anchor id=a487.12>þá mátt-lítell, ok bergðe hann þó kiot<hi>v</hi>e þann dag; ok sýnde þau <anchor id=a487.13>d&oeacute;me af ser at svá vas betr g&oelig;rt.

<p n=10.5><anchor id=a487.14><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hann lagðe á þat mikla stund, at halda þeim m&aolig;nnom saman <anchor id=a487.15>es teingðer vóro helgom hiúskap; en lagðe þeim m&aolig;nnom þunga<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a487.16>hlute á hendr í fé-gi&aolig;ldom ok skriftom, es af því brugðo stórom: <anchor id=a487.17>þótte hónom sem Goðe m&oelig;nde í því mest mót-g&oelig;rð, ef þat efter-læte, <anchor id=a487.18>es hann hefer mest veitt m&aolig;nnom þessa heims hluta, ok g&oelig;rt <anchor id=a487.19>þat, fyr ástar sakar ok miskunnar sínnar ok girndar mannanna, <anchor id=a487.20>rétt<note place=apparatus id=an487.2 lang="en-UK"><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef lang=is>rétt]</ab> here resumes the second leaf of <hi>a</hi>.</note> ok blezat, sem h&aolig;foð-synð es ellegar, ef þat vas herfelega neist<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a487.21>ok ranglega raskat. En þau fé, es menn guldo fyr van-hage sína, <anchor id=a487.22>lét hann aldrege koma við &aolig;nnor<note place=apparatus id=an487.3><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&aolig;nnor]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; annat, Cd.</note> fé, heldr lagðe hann þau<note place=apparatus id=an487.4><ab type=textRef>þau]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; þat, Cd.</note> til þess, <anchor id=a488.1><pb id=pb488 n=488><note place=margin>[107: 16.]</note>at þau hiú, es vel fóro<note place=apparatus id=an488.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fóro]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; vóro, Cd.</note> saman ok fé-laus vóro, mætte þá heldr saman <anchor id=a488.2>vesa an áðr; ok yrðe þeim þat nockvat til skióls ok yfer-bóta sínna <anchor id=a488.3>ó-ráða, es féin h&aolig;fðo láteð.

<p n=10.6><anchor id=a488.4><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þorlákr byscop rauf þau r&aoacute;ð &aolig;ll á sínom d&aolig;gom, sem hann <anchor id=a488.5>visse at ó-l&aolig;gom ráðen vesa, hvárt sem hlut &aoacute;tto í meire menn eðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a488.6>minne. Eige varð hann við suma h&aolig;fðingja<note place=apparatus id=an488.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>h&aolig;fðingja]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; menn né h., Cd.</note> með &aolig;llo sam-hoga; <anchor id=a488.7>þvi at hann samþykðe þat eitt við þá es vel samðe; þótte hónom <anchor id=a488.8>þat miklo meira niðr-fall Goðs Cristne ef g&aolig;fgom m&aolig;nnom g&aoacute;fosc <anchor id=a488.9>stórer hluter yfer: virðe hann ok við þá eige meire várkunn, at <anchor id=a488.10>hepta sik eige at ó-leyfðom<note place=apparatus id=an488.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ó-leyfðom]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; olyðnom, Cd.</note> hlutom, es áðr h&aolig;fðo bæðe miket lán af<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a488.11>Goðe í auðræðom<note place=apparatus id=an488.4><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>auðræðom]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; auðæfum, Cd.</note> ok mann-virðingom.

<p n=11.1><anchor id=a488.12><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> Nú es at segja af hvers-dags-h&aoacute;ttom ens sæla Þorláks <anchor id=a488.13>byscops, hve iafn-lyndr hann vas í góðom hlutom: <anchor id=a488.14>hann mælte aldregi þat orð es eige k&oeacute;me til nackverrar nyt-semðar, <anchor id=a488.15>ef hann vas at því sóttr. Hann vas ok svá varr í sínom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a488.16>orðom, at hann lastaðe aldregi veðr, sem marger g&oelig;ra; ok enga <anchor id=a488.17>þá hlute es eige vóro lastande, ok hann sá at efter Goðs vilja fóro<note place=apparatus id=an488.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fóro]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; vóro, Cd.</note>. <anchor id=a488.18>Hann langaðe til &oelig;ngra d&oeacute;gra; hann kvídde ok &oelig;ngo<hi>m</hi> vilge<note place=apparatus id=an488.6><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vilge]</ab> add. <hi>a</hi>.</note> <anchor id=a488.19>miok nema Alþinge ok Imbro-d&aolig;gom: af því Alþinge, at hónom <anchor id=a488.20>þótte margr maðr þar verða villr vega um sín mála-ferle, sá es<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a488.21>mikels vas virðr ok hónom þótte miket við liggja: en af því Imbro-d&aolig;gom<note place=apparatus id=an488.7><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Imbro-]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; Ymbro-, Cd.</note>, <anchor id=a489.1><pb id=pb489 n=489><note place=margin>[108: 16.]</note>at hónom þótte þat ábyrgðar-ráð miket at vígja menn, es <anchor id=a489.2>til þess sótto langan veg, ok hann sá þá miok van-f&oeacute;ra til, bæðe <anchor id=a489.3>saker lítels lærdóms ok annarra hátta ser ú-skapfelldra; en hann <anchor id=a489.4>nennte þó varla at níta<note place=apparatus id=an489.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>níta]</ab> varna, <hi>a</hi>.</note>, bæðe saker fát&oeacute;kes þeirra sialfra, ok fyr <anchor id=a489.5>saker þeirra manna es þeim h&aolig;fðo kennt eðr sínar iarteiner h&aolig;fðo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a489.6>til sent: en sagðe hann hverjom þeirra greinelega, hvat hverre <anchor id=a489.7>vígslo fylgðe til vanda, ok fal þeim si&aolig;lfom ábyrgð á hende ok <anchor id=a489.8>þeim es þá sendo til<note place=apparatus id=an489.2><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sendo til]</ab> <foreign lang=en-UK>A here puts, in a manifest repetition of 11. 5, the following:</foreign> Þorlákr lét opt kenna kenningar; af þvi at hann sá þat, þótt eige yrðe opt hlýtt svá skynsamlega sem skylde bók-sogom, at þó dvalde þat þá únýtar gerðer fyr morgom monnom.</note>.

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a489.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann vas svá iafn-lyndr í f&aolig;stom sínom, þá es hann vas <anchor id=a489.10>heima, en í v&aolig;kom ok b&oeacute;na-halde, hvárt sem hann vas heima eðr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a489.11>eige, at til ens sama vas ey at ætla. Hann nýtte svá lítt f&oeacute;zlo, at <anchor id=a489.12>eige mátte annat <hi>g</hi>líkara<note place=apparatus id=an489.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> líkara, <hi>a</hi>.</note> þickja an hann m&oelig;nde þá optazt<note place=apparatus id=an489.4><ab type=textRef>optazt]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; optar, Cd.</note> við <anchor id=a489.13>skiljazc es hónom þótte mest fyrer. Svá vas hónom um dryck <anchor id=a489.14>faret, at aldregi mátte finna, at á hann fenge, þó at hann hefðe <anchor id=a489.15>þess-kyns dryck. En hann vas svá dryck-sæll, þá es hann veitte<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a489.16>vinom sínom<note place=apparatus id=an489.5><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá es ... vinom sínom]</ab> add. <hi>a</hi>.</note>, at þat &aolig;l brásc<note place=apparatus id=an489.6><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>brásc]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; brast, Cd.</note> aldregi es hann blezaðe ok hann <anchor id=a489.17>signde sínne hende, þá es gerð skylde koma<note place=apparatus id=an489.7><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> þá es gerðar beidde, <hi>a</hi>.</note>. Hann vas svá ú-vand-bl&oeacute;tr<note place=apparatus id=an489.8>ú-vand-bl&oeacute;tr] <hi>a</hi>; úvand-látr, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a489.18>ok vin-veittr at þeim veizlom es dryckjor vóro<note place=apparatus id=an489.9><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es dr. vóro]</ab> <hi>a</hi>; es dryckr var, Cd.</note>, at hann <anchor id=a489.19>s&oeacute;mðe við allt þat es s&oeacute;manda vas ok<note place=apparatus id=an489.10><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es s&oelig;manda vas ok]</ab> add. <hi>a</hi>.</note> eige s&oeacute;mðe ílla. En þá es <anchor id=a489.20>Þorlákr byscop drack vatn eðr ú-áfengenn dryck, þá fór hann svá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a490.1><pb id=pb490 n=490><note place=margin>[108: 16.]</note>stillelega með, ok (með) svá mikelle bindende, at hann saup á þriá <anchor id=a490.2>sopa, eðr fimm, eðr siau, en nálega aldrege<note place=apparatus id=an490.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <hi>a</hi>; homoiotel. in A, from aldrege to aldrege.</note> framarr; hann drack <anchor id=a490.3>ok nálega aldrege mat-mála í mille ó-siúkr, ef eige vóro almennings <anchor id=a490.4>dryckjor<note place=apparatus id=an490.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> alþýðo dryckjor, <hi>a</hi>.</note>.

<p n=11.3><anchor id=a490.5><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þorlákr byscop<note place=apparatus id=an490.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þórl. bp.]</ab> here <hi>a</hi> ends.</note> vas aldrege all-vel heill í sínom byscopsdóme;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a490.6>ok vas þat sem v&aoacute;n vas, at því sem Póll Postole seger, at &lsquo;Kraft-renn <anchor id=a490.7>alg&oelig;resc af siúk-leiknom.&rsquo; At-g&oelig;rðer lét hann lækna oft <anchor id=a490.8>hafa at ser við sínne meinseme; ok sýnde þat, at Goð hefer til <anchor id=a490.9>setta lækna, at þeir skolo stundom mega, at Dróttens vilja, með <anchor id=a490.10>sk&aolig;mmom sárleikom st&oelig;ðva l&aolig;ng ó-h&oeacute;gende.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=11.4><anchor id=a490.11><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þorlákr byscop hafðe skynsamlegan h&aoacute;tt á síno b&oeacute;na-halde <anchor id=a490.12>frá því sem flester menn aðrer: hann s&oelig;ng fyrst <hi lang=la>Credo</hi> ok <hi lang=la>Pater <anchor id=a490.13>Noster</hi>, efter þat es hann hafðe signt sik; ok ymna, <hi lang=la>Jesu Nostra <anchor id=a490.14>Redemptio</hi>; ok lét þat þegar þar á finna, at hann hugsaðe iamnan <anchor id=a490.15>til þeirrar lausnar es Goð hafðe leyst mann-kynet, ...<note place=apparatus id=an490.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>kynet ...]</ab> something seems to be missing here.</note> ok sanna &aoacute;st<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a490.16>við Goð ok menn; girnð eilífrar sælo, ok sam-vistar við Goð; ótte <anchor id=a490.17>Dóms-dags, ok hingat-kváma Skaparans at d&oeacute;ma um allt mann-kyn. <anchor id=a490.18>Þetta allt boðar þessar Ymne. Þá s&oelig;ng hann Gregorius-b&oeacute;n <anchor id=a490.19>á meðan hann klædde sik; ok þar efter enn fyrsta psalm or <anchor id=a490.20>Psaltara, ok lét ser aldrege or hog ganga þau heilræðe es í Psalm-enom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a490.21>standa, at &lsquo;Sá es sæll es eige gengr efter ó-r&aoacute;ðom, ok eige <anchor id=a490.22>samþycker ílla hlute með synðogom, og eige d&oeacute;mer ranga dóma, <anchor id=a491.1><pb id=pb491 n=491><note place=margin>[109: 16.]</note>ok iamnan geymer Goðs laga.&rsquo; En es hann kom til kirkjo, s&oelig;ng <anchor id=a491.2>hann fyrst lof Heilagre Þrenningo. Efter þat lofaðe hann með <anchor id=a491.3>s&oelig;ngom þá heilaga menn es kirkjan vas vígð, sú es þá vas hann í, <anchor id=a491.4>ok þar vóro helger dómar varð-veitter. Síðan las hann Mário-tíðer; <anchor id=a491.5>ok efter þat lagðesc hann niðr fyr altare allr til iarðar, þá es<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a491.6>eige vas heilagt, ok bað lenge fyrer allre Goðs Cristne. Ok hvern <anchor id=a491.7>dag s&oelig;ng hann þriðiung Psaltara um framm vana-s&oelig;ng sínn, hvárt <anchor id=a491.8>sem hann vas heima eðr eige. Ok s&oelig;ng fleira miðlom psalma, an <anchor id=a491.9>aðrer menn: hann s&oelig;ng fyrst, <hi lang=la>Gloria Patri</hi>, af Heilagre Þrenning; <anchor id=a491.10>þá næst: <hi lang=la>Miserere mei Deus</hi>; þá, <hi lang=la>Salvum fac Pater et Domine</hi> fyr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a491.11>&aolig;llo Cristno folke. En ef hónom b&aoacute;ro til vanda-m&aoacute;l, s&oelig;ng hann <anchor id=a491.12>þat vers sem Salomon enn Spake bað til Goðs á sínom d&aolig;gom, <anchor id=a491.13><hi lang=la>Mitte mihi, Domine, auxilium de Sancto</hi>. En es hann geck frá <anchor id=a491.14>mat-borðe, s&oelig;ng hann: <hi lang=la>Benedicam Dominum in omni tempore</hi>. En <anchor id=a491.15>es hann af-klæddesc til svefns, s&oelig;ng hann þann psalm, es Dróttenn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a491.16>es minntr á sítt heit at þeir skyle &oelig;rugger vesa es sítt ráð varð-veita <anchor id=a491.17>réttlega, ok misbióða &aolig;ðrom hvár<hi>t</hi>ke í orðom né g&oelig;rðom. <anchor id=a491.18>Þesse psalmr es, <hi lang=la>Domine, quis habitabit<note place=apparatus id=an491.1><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> habitavit, Cd.</note></hi>; ok vas hónom miket ynðe <anchor id=a491.19>at halda slíkar venjor, ok vætte<note place=apparatus id=an491.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vætte]</ab> vente, Cd.</note> at nockvorr monde efter hans <anchor id=a491.20>h&aoacute;ttom víkja.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=11.5><anchor id=a491.21><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hann hende<note place=apparatus id=an491.3><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Hann hende (hente, Cd.)</note> skemtan at s&aolig;gom ok kvæðom, ok at &aolig;llom <anchor id=a492.1><pb id=pb492 n=492><note place=margin>[109, 294: 17, 28.]</note>streng-leikom ok lióð-f&oelig;rom, ok at hyggenna manna r&oeacute;ðom ok <anchor id=a492.2>draumom; ok at &aoacute;llo því es góðra manna skemtan vas, útan <anchor id=a492.3>leikom; þvi at hónom þótte slíkt dvelja ú-nýtar sýslor vándra <anchor id=a492.4>manna<note place=apparatus id=an492.1><ab type=textRef>... manna]</ab> B; Þ. bp. lét opt skemta bæðe sogom ok kvæðom, kveðande ok horpo slætte; hann kende ok mikit gaman at &aolig;llo tale því es hyggilegt vas, ok hann sá at til nockurrar nytsemðar kom; varð hann af slíko ástsæll af ollom þeim er hiá vóro, B.</note>.

<p n=11.6><anchor id=a492.5><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þorlák byscop dreymðe þann draum á Alþinge, at hann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a492.6>þóttesc ganga frá kirkjo þar á þingeno heim til búðar sínnar, ok <anchor id=a492.7>bera h&aolig;foð ens heilaga Martini í faðme ser: en Póll prestr af <anchor id=a492.8>Reykja-holte, dýrðlegr maðr, réð svá þann draum, at hann sialfr <anchor id=a492.9>m&oelig;nde þar efter bera heilags byscops h&aolig;foð hvert es hann f&oeacute;re. <anchor id=a492.10>Ok es nú &aolig;llom auð-sýnt, at þat es satt.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=12.1><anchor id=a492.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an492.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> The rest of the Saga is taken from B (AM.) 379, 382.</note>Þá es Þorlákr byscop hafðe xv vetr at stóle seteð í <anchor id=a492.12>Scála-holte með byscops-tign í bi&aolig;rtom blóma góðrar <anchor id=a492.13>atferðar, elskaðr af Goðe ok góðom m&aolig;nnom; miok m&oeacute;ddr af <anchor id=a492.14>mót-g&oelig;rðom manna, ok þar með af marg-faldre van-heilso, þá <anchor id=a492.15>lýste hann því leynelega fyrer nockorom sínom trúnaðar-m&aolig;nnom,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a492.16>at hann m&oelig;nde vilja upp gefa þann byscopsdóm, ok sagðe þá <anchor id=a492.17>þurfa at fá styrkvara eyk under þat ok, sem hann hafðe áðr við <anchor id=a492.18>genget: en hann vilde sialfr víkja aftr í Canoca-setr sítt með lítilæte, <anchor id=a492.19>ok þióna þar Goðe ok helgom m&aolig;nnom meðan hann lifðe.

<p><anchor id=a492.20>En Allz-valdande Goð es hann hafðe upp hafet á eno hæsto palla<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a492.21>kenne-mannlegrar tignar, sá þá, at hónom mátte þó endasc til <anchor id=a492.22>háleitrar &aolig;mbonar, þótt eige minkaðesc hans tign í manna auglite; <anchor id=a492.23>ok lét hann þat af því eige framm ganga, heldr sá hann hónom <anchor id=a493.1><pb id=pb493 n=493><note place=margin>[295: 28.]</note>þann viðr-búneng til handa móte síno andláte, sem hverr vitr maðr <anchor id=a493.2>m&oelig;nde kiósa ser ok sínom ást-m&aolig;nnom.

<p n=12.2><anchor id=a493.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þorlákr byscop fór þann fiórðung síðast yfer es hónom vas <anchor id=a493.4>nálægaztr; ok tók í Borgarfirðe þá sótt, es hann leidde til grafar. <anchor id=a493.5>Hann kom heim til stóls síns með lítlom mætte, ok lá í reckjo þriá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a493.6>m&aoacute;noðr, ok hafði iamnan m&oeacute;ðosama sótt, en aldrege harða verke; <anchor id=a493.7>ok mátte hann allra hluta svá geyma, sem þá es hann vas heill <anchor id=a493.8>maðr, þat es mest lá við, bæðe hónom ok &aolig;ðrom. Þá vas komenn <anchor id=a493.9>at vist í Scála-holt Giz&oelig;rr Hallz son, es bæðe vas vitr ok góð-giarn. <anchor id=a493.10>Hann kom oft at finna byscop í hans van-mætte, ok styrkðe<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a493.11>hann í m&aolig;rgom fagrlegom d&oeacute;me-s&aolig;gom, fróðlegom ok fá-heyrðom, <anchor id=a493.12>frá helgom m&aolig;nnom eðr &aolig;ðrom góðom m&aolig;nnom, þeim es bazt <anchor id=a493.13>h&aolig;fðo boret sín meinlæte í mann-raunom. Marger kvómo þá ok <anchor id=a493.14>viner hans ok frændr at finna hann, ok þiggja af hónom heil r&aoacute;ð, <anchor id=a493.15>en sýna á hónom fasta &aoacute;st með fullom aloga. Póll systor-son<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a493.16>hans kom til hans í sóttenne, ok sýnde enn sem fyrr, at hann vas <anchor id=a493.17>hónom ástsamastr allra sínna g&aolig;fogra frænda.

<p n=12.3><anchor id=a493.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En es miok tók at líða at Þorláki byscope, þá sende hann efter <anchor id=a493.19>Þórvalde, syne Giz&oelig;rar Hallz sonar, es mann-vit ok minne hafðe í <anchor id=a493.20><hi>g</hi>n&oelig;gsta lage, ok iamnan þótte vel til fallenn at hafa ætlan eða or-skurðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a493.21>á um þat es miklo varðaðe. Ok es hann kom, þá tiáðe <anchor id=a493.22>byscopenn fyr hónom fiár-hage staðarens þá es h&aolig;fðo veret þá es <anchor id=a493.23>hann kom til, ok hverso þá vas komeð, es hann ætlaðe ser eige <anchor id=a494.1><pb id=pb494 n=494><note place=margin>[295: 28.]</note>lengr fiár-forr&aoacute;ð. Hann talðe ok upp fyrer hónom greinelega fiár-till&aolig;g <anchor id=a494.2>þau es hann hafðe haft við frændr sína, síðan hann kom til <anchor id=a494.3>staðarens forráða; ok hverso hann hafðe þeim til þrifnaðar komet, <anchor id=a494.4>hvat sem at s&aolig;k hafðe. Ok es þeir s&aoacute; þat, at staðrenn hafðe miok <anchor id=a494.5>h&oeacute;gsc til forráða, ok auðgasc at fé, en þeim vas m&aolig;rgom fé-fátt es<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a494.6>hónom vóro náner at frændseme, þá g&oeacute;dde hann enn, með ráðe <anchor id=a494.7>Þórvallz ok annarra vina sínna, frændr sína með fiár-till&aolig;gom.

<p n=12.4><anchor id=a494.8><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hann lýste þvi, at hann vilde klæðnat sínn gefa kenne-m&aolig;nnom; <anchor id=a494.9>en þann es fé-mestr vas, gaf hann byscope þeim es efter <anchor id=a494.10>sik k&oeacute;me; ok vilde hann þat eige ákveðom leiða, hverr sá m&oelig;nde<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a494.11>vesa: annan klæðnat allan gaf hann prestom ok &aolig;ðrom clercom; <anchor id=a494.12>en fát&oeacute;kom m&aolig;nnom þann es fé-minztr vas; þvi at hann lét þá <anchor id=a494.13>aldrege hiá sitja þá es hann skifte gi&aolig;fom með vinom sínom; vas <anchor id=a494.14>hónom ok þá ynðe at því hve m&aolig;rg hundroð hann hafðe gefet <anchor id=a494.15>á hverjom misserom, en m&aolig;rgom skip-pundom mat. Brande<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a494.16>byscope at Hólom gaf hann fingr-goll: en þat fingr-goll, sem hann <anchor id=a494.17>sialfr hafðe boret daglega ser á hende, gaf hann Póle systor-syne <anchor id=a494.18>sínom; ok vas þat vígt; ok virðo þat marger vesa fyrir-sp&aoacute; hans <anchor id=a494.19>tignar þeirrar sem efter kom. En sú auðna vas á því þegar, sem <anchor id=a494.20>nú undrasc einge, at hverr þóttesc nockot gótt af hlióta, es þær<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a494.21>minjar hafðe, es hann hafðe átt.

<p n=12.5><anchor id=a494.22><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þorlákr byscop r&oeacute;dde greinelega &aolig;ll leyndar-m&aoacute;l fyrer Þórvalde, <anchor id=a494.23>áðr þeir skilðosc, þau es hónom m&aoacute;tto nauðsynleg þyckja, <anchor id=a494.24>sum til leyndar, en sum til upp-burðar efter sínn dag.

<pb id=pb495 n=495><note place=margin>[296: 29.]</note>

<p n=12.6><anchor id=a495.1><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Siau nóttom fyrer andlát sítt kallaðe byscop saman lærða <anchor id=a495.2>menn, ok lét olea sik. Ok áðr hann være smurðr, mælte hann <anchor id=a495.3>miok langt &oelig;rende; en þó vas hónom málet þungt ok ervitt.

<p><anchor id=a495.4>&lsquo;Ek lá fyrr í reckjo,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;með lítlom mætte, ok vas-ek <anchor id=a495.5>þá oleaðr í þeirre sótt: ok es þar vas komeð s&aolig;ng<hi>v</hi>enom sem nú<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a495.6>es, þá mælta-ek svá fyrer, at aller þeir menn, sem í mínom stór-mælom <anchor id=a495.7>være, skylde frialser vesa mínna um-mæla ef mik t&oeacute;ke frá: <anchor id=a495.8>ætlaða-ek þeim þat til líknar; en mer eige til áfallz dóms si&aolig;lfom.<note place=apparatus id=an495.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> Here B (382) resumes.</note> <anchor id=a495.9>En mer vas þat svá launat, at þeir sem eige vildo f&oeacute;ra á-leiðis <anchor id=a495.10>fyrer mer, s&aolig;gðo þá siá mega, hvárt ek þóttomc of-fare veret hafa<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a495.11>í mínom um-mælom, es ek vilda þá &aolig;llom lina efter mítt líf-lát. <anchor id=a495.12>En ek mon nú raun til gera, hvárt heldr hefer veret: skoloð ér nú <anchor id=a495.13>þau mín um-mæle heyra ok frá bera, at ek vil at &aolig;ll um-mæle mín <anchor id=a495.14>sé en s&aolig;mo ok stríð-mæle, nema þeir sættesc við þá menn sem ek <anchor id=a495.15>hefe til fenget mín m&aoacute;l at leysa; ok lofa-ek &oelig;nga lausn aðra an<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a495.16>þá sem ek hefer áðr til lagt; ella bíðe þeir þess byscops es efter <anchor id=a495.17>mik k&oelig;mr til.&rsquo;

<p n=12.7><anchor id=a495.18><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> En es hann hafðe þetta mælt, þá hvílðesc hann fyrst, ok <anchor id=a495.19>síðan talaðe hann til þeirra manna es við vóro stadder: &lsquo;Ek vil <anchor id=a495.20>biðja yðr,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;at ér fyrer-láteð mer þat, es ek hefe svá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a495.21>g&oelig;rt at yðr hefer eige vel þótt.&rsquo; Aller sv&aolig;roðo þeir es við vóro, <anchor id=a495.22>at eingis mætte þeir hann kunna, en vildo þó giarnsamlega veita <anchor id=a495.23>hónom þat es hann beidde. Þá mælte Giz&oelig;rr Hallz son fyrer allra <anchor id=a496.1><pb id=pb496 n=496><note place=margin>[297: 29.]</note>þeirra h&aolig;nd&mdash;sá es at &aolig;llo vas bazt til fallenn&mdash;&lsquo;Vér biðjom yðr, <anchor id=a496.2>herra, at ér fyrer-gefit oss þat es vær h&aolig;fom mis-mælt eða mis-g&oelig;rt <anchor id=a496.3>við yðr, es vær erom hrædder um, at bæðe sé mart ok stórt.&rsquo; Enn <anchor id=a496.4>sæle Þorlákr byscop iáttaðe því blíðlega. Þá mælte Giz&oelig;rr annat <anchor id=a496.5>sinn þat &oelig;rende, at nú má auð-sýnt vesa, at Heilagr ande hefer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a496.6>mælt með hónom: &lsquo;Þess biðjom vér yðr, herra,&rsquo; sagðe hann, &lsquo;þó <anchor id=a496.7>at ér skilesc nu sýnelega við oss at líkam-legre sam-vist: veseð oss <anchor id=a496.8>andlegr faðer, ok árnande miskonnar við Almátkan Goð, þvi at <anchor id=a496.9>vær trúom því, at ér monoð eige minna hafa vald í andlego lífe <anchor id=a496.10>með Goðe, an nú hafeð ér.&rsquo; En hann þagðe þá, ok svaraðe &oelig;ngo;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a496.11>ok es nú auð-sýnt hví hann g&oelig;rðe svá, þvi at nú veiter hann &aolig;llom <anchor id=a496.12>þat sem hann vas þá beðenn; en vilde þó eige bert g&oelig;ra fyrer <anchor id=a496.13>líti-lætis sakar, at hann sam-þyktesc við at hann m&oelig;nde til þess <anchor id=a496.14>f&oeacute;rr vesa. G&oelig;rðe hann þetta at efter-d&oeacute;me Goðs sonar, es hann <anchor id=a496.15>sam-þyckte þat sumt þegjande sem satt vas, efter því sem helger<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a496.16>menn segja. En es þeir h&aolig;fðo þetta mælt, þá feck þeim svá mikels, <anchor id=a496.17>es við vóro stadder, at fáer m&aoacute;tto vatne halda.

<p n=12.8><anchor id=a496.18><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> En es herra byscop sá þat<note place=apparatus id=an496.1><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sá þat]</ab> hafðe um stund þagat, AM. 379.</note>, þá mælte hann: &lsquo;Láteð yðr þat <anchor id=a496.19>eige mikels fá þó at skile órar sam-vistor. Ek hefe vereð alla g&aolig;to <anchor id=a496.20>lítill sk&aolig;rungr, ok til lítils f&oeacute;rr, ef eige hefðe aðrer menn mik<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a496.21>studdan; því es yðr eige skaðe at mer; ferr ek ok efter mínom <anchor id=a496.22>forl&aolig;gom: en sá mon koma efter mik, es mikell sk&aolig;rungr mun. <anchor id=a496.23>Vil ek yðr ok í því hugga, at ek vænter, at Goð mun mik eige <anchor id=a497.1><pb id=pb497 n=497><note place=margin>[297: 30.]</note>helvítis-mann d&oeacute;ma.&rsquo; Síðan mintesc hann til allra kenne-manna, <anchor id=a497.2>ok þeirra annarra sem hiá hónom vóro, ok gaf þeim &aolig;llom blezan <anchor id=a497.3>sína. Efter þat vas hann oleaðr til lykta; en síðan vilde hann <anchor id=a497.4>ecki tala nema þat es hónom þótte mest nauðsyn á; en iamnan<note place=apparatus id=an497.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> Here two leaves are missing in B (382), the text taken from AM. 379.</note> <anchor id=a497.5>þá es hann mátte, þá hr&oeacute;rðosc varrarnar til b&oeacute;na-haldzens<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a497.6>meðan hann lifðe.

<p n=12.9><anchor id=a497.7><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Þá es siau nætr vóro liðnar frá því es enn sæle Þorlákr <anchor id=a497.8>byscop vas oleaðr, þá beiddesc hann snemma þess dags klæða-skiptess. <anchor id=a497.9>Þá geck at hónom Ormr prestr Eyjolfs son, capalin hans, <anchor id=a497.10>ok mælte: &lsquo;Oss þycker ábyrgð í at hr&oeacute;ra yðr, herra, svá miok,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a497.11>með svá lítlom mætte sem ér eroð. Eða vilet ér or þessom klæðom <anchor id=a497.12>f&oeacute;rðer vesa, ef ér verðet skamm-lífer?&rsquo; Byscop svarar: &lsquo;Vel mun <anchor id=a497.13>duga at hr&oeacute;ra mik; en af smurningenne vænter-ek mer miskunnar <anchor id=a497.14>af Goðe, en ecki af klæðom þessom.&rsquo; Vóro hónom þá fengen <anchor id=a497.15>&aolig;nnor klæðe<note place=apparatus id=an497.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Eða vilet ér or þ. klæðom ... &aolig;nnor klæðe]</ab> thus A, partly mended (eða v. ér eige í þesse klæðe færðer vera, A); með svá l. m. sem ér eroð; vel mon þat endaz, seger hann; var svá gort sem hann beidde, ok endesk ..., B, a sort of homoiotel. (endezk vel).</note>, ok endesc þat vel sem hann hafðe sagt. Eige s&aoacute;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a497.16>menn at svá stórom t&oeacute;ke af mætte hans (þann dag) sem vas <anchor id=a497.17>reyndar; af þvi at þá hélt hann enn &aolig;llom h&aoacute;ttom sínom góðom <anchor id=a497.18>enom s&aolig;mom sem þangat til h&aolig;fðo veret, þótt megnet være lítit, <anchor id=a497.19>þá vas hugar-faret þó stað-fast sem áðr. En es nockot kveldaðe <anchor id=a497.20>þann dag, þá tók miok at hónom at líða; ok es aptan-s&oelig;ng<hi>v</hi>e vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a497.21>loket, þá þótte síga á hann ómegen nockot; ok es hann hóf upp <anchor id=a497.22>augon, þá mælte hann: &lsquo;Hvert fóroð ér Þórkell nú?&rsquo; Virðe <anchor id=a498.1><pb id=pb498 n=498><note place=margin>[298: 30.]</note>Giz&oelig;rr Hallz son svá, at því sýndesc Þórkell byscope við andlát <anchor id=a498.2>sítt, at hann hafðe berlegazt spanðan hann frá vándo.

<p n=12.10><anchor id=a498.3><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> En es Þorlákr byscop vas at andláte komenn, þá beiddesc <anchor id=a498.4>hann at drecka; ok es hann vilde til víkjasc, þá hné<note place=apparatus id=an498.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hné]</ab> A and B.</note> hann at <anchor id=a498.5>h&oeacute;gendonom, ok sofnaðe s&oeacute;tlega til Goðs; ok veitte Goð hónom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a498.6>þá dýrð, at hann skylde þyrsta við sítt andlát sem sialfan Goðs <anchor id=a498.7>son; ok skylde hvár<hi>s</hi>kis þorste fyrr st&oelig;ðvasc an í ó-endelego<note place=apparatus id=an498.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ó-endelego]</ab> emend.; andlego, B.</note> lífe, <anchor id=a498.8>því er Goðs syner<note place=apparatus id=an498.3><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>syner]</ab> A; viner, 379.</note> ero iamnan þyrster til. Auðsýnelegt lét Goð <anchor id=a498.9>þat vesa í andláte ens sæla Þorláks byscops, at hann emnde<note place=apparatus id=an498.4><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> ende, B.</note> þat þá, <anchor id=a498.10>es hann sagðe fyre munn Dávíðs, at &lsquo;Dýrðlegr m&oelig;nde vesa í Goðs<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a498.11>auglite dauðe heilagra manna hans.&rsquo; Ok þó at þat være þá enn <anchor id=a498.12>leynt fyre m&aolig;nnom, at þau<note place=apparatus id=an498.5><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þau]</ab> þat, Cd.</note> emne være um ráð (byscops), sem nú <anchor id=a498.13>ero vitoð, þá þótte &oelig;ngom manne efter því hiá hónom at vesa sem <anchor id=a498.14>hiá &aolig;ðrom m&aolig;nnom &aolig;ndoðom, heldr þótte flestom betra hiá hans <anchor id=a498.15>líke at vesa, an hiá &aolig;ðrom m&aolig;nnom lifondom.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=13.1><anchor id=a498.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> Þeir hluter urðo efter andlát Þorláks byscops, es þeim <anchor id=a498.17>m&aolig;nnom þótte mikels um vert es við vóro stadder ok <anchor id=a498.18>s&aoacute;; en því s&aolig;gðo þeir f&aoacute;m m&aolig;nnom frá í fyrsto, at þeir vænto at <anchor id=a498.19>Goð m&oelig;nde (þat) enn framar birta an þá sýndesc. Sá vas einn <anchor id=a498.20>hlutr, at litr hans vas miklo biartare ok þeckelegre an annarra<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a498.21>andaðra manna: sá vas annarr, at svá vóro siáldren bi&aolig;rt í augom <anchor id=a498.22>hans langa stund efter andlát hans sem lifanda mannz þess sem <anchor id=a499.1><pb id=pb499 n=499><note place=margin>[299: 31.]</note>skygn es: sá vas enn þriðe hlutr, at s&aoacute;r vóro m&aolig;rg fallen á <anchor id=a499.2>h&aolig;rund hans bæðe sm&aoacute; ok stór, en &aolig;ll vóro þau gróen es til vas <anchor id=a499.3>leitað; ok þótte þá þegar mikels um vert þeim es visso; en nú <anchor id=a499.4>undrasc einge þót<hi>t</hi> svá hafe orðet. Þá vas dúkr breiddr yfer andlit <anchor id=a499.5>hónom; ok es Giz&oelig;rr kom til, mælte hann: &lsquo;Láte oss siá f&aolig;ðor<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a499.6>várn.&rsquo; Vas þá af tekenn dúkrenn. En es hann sá í andlit hans, <anchor id=a499.7>þótte hónom því meira um vert hverja þeckt es bauð, sem hann <anchor id=a499.8>kunne g&oelig;rst at siá. Efter þat vas búet um líkama Þorláks byscops <anchor id=a499.9>vandlega, ok skoret hár hans; ok hafa menn af þeim helgom dóm <anchor id=a499.10>mikla fró.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=13.2><anchor id=a499.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann andaðesc Fimta dag vico heldr síð dags, einne nátt <anchor id=a499.12>fyre atfangs dag Ióla<note place=apparatus id=an499.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Þorlákr byscop andaðesk á Þórsdag einne nótt fyre Ióla-aptan, A (St.).</note>. Þá vas hann sex-t&oelig;gr at aldre, ok hafðe <anchor id=a499.13>xv vetr byscop veret. Þá vas liðet frá Hingað-burðe Várs Herra <anchor id=a499.14>Jesu Christi mclxxx ok vj<note place=apparatus id=an499.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mclxxx ok vj]</ab> thus A (St.); þús-hundrat niotiger ok þriú ár, efter tolo Dionisi, B.</note> vetr.

<p n=14.1><anchor id=a499.15><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> Um morgonenn efter vas lík Þorláks byscops boret í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a499.16>kirkjo, ok stóð uppe í s&aolig;ng-húse ij<note place=apparatus id=an499.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ij]</ab> AM. 219; ij, Cd.</note> nætr at bíða <anchor id=a499.17>graftar. En annan dag Ióla vas hann í i&aolig;rð lag<hi>i</hi>ðr; vas þar <anchor id=a499.18>við staddr Póll diacn, frænde hans, es byscop varð efter hann; ok <anchor id=a499.19>aller lærðer menn es í n&aoacute;nd vóro. Þar kom þá ok lík þess fát&oeacute;ks <anchor id=a499.20>mannz es byscop hafðe teket af válaðe, ok veitt til dauða-dags:<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a499.21>sá hafðe lík-þrárr veret; ok vilde Goð þá sýna þar þat <anchor id=a500.1><pb id=pb500 n=500><note place=margin>[299: 31.]</note>milde-verk sem eitt vas af m&aolig;rgom þeim es hann g&oelig;rðe fyre Goðs <anchor id=a500.2>saker í síno lífe.

<p n=14.2><anchor id=a500.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En áðr menn genge frá greftre ens sæla Þorláks byscops, þá <anchor id=a500.4>mælte Giz&oelig;rr Hallz son langt &oelig;rende ok fagrt um þau tíðende <anchor id=a500.5>es þar h&aolig;fðo g&oelig;rzc, efter því sem siðr es til yfer tigenna manna<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a500.6>greftre. Ok vil-ek geta nockorra orða hans<note place=apparatus id=an500.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>orða hans]</ab> seger sá er sogona setti, add. A; seger sogo-meistarenn, B.</note> þeirra es hann talaðe, <anchor id=a500.7>ok mer ganga sízt or minne: hann tiáðe þat fyrst fyre þeim <anchor id=a500.8>hverr nytja-maðr hann hafðe veret staðnom ok &aolig;llo landz-folkeno. <anchor id=a500.9>Efter þat mælte hann svá:

<p n=14.3><anchor id=a500.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> <note place=apparatus id=an500.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> Here 382 resumes.</note>&lsquo;Ek hefe her vereð nockorom sinnom staddr, þá es þau<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a500.11>tíðende hafa g&oelig;rzc es þessom ero glík: fimm byscopar hafa her <anchor id=a500.12>vereð niðr setter at mer hiá vesanda; fyrst Þorlákr byscop Rúnolfs <anchor id=a500.13>son; þá Ketill byscop; en síðan Magnús byscop; efter þat <anchor id=a500.14>Kl&oeacute;ngr byscop; en nú Þorlákr byscop. Ek hefer ok talat nockor <anchor id=a500.15>orð, þá (es) þesser atburðer hafa g&oelig;rzc sem siðvenja es til í<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a500.16>&aolig;ðrom l&aolig;ndom yfer tigenna manna greftre. En mála-efne hafa <anchor id=a500.17>veret iamnan stórlega góð; þvi at þeir hafa aller veret ener mesto <anchor id=a500.18>merkis-menn í sínom byscopsdóme: ok es gótt á þat at minnasc, <anchor id=a500.19>at várre grein, ok at s&aolig;gn várra forellra um þá byscopa es her <anchor id=a500.20>hafa veret fyrer óra daga, ok á órom d&aolig;gom, at sá þycker hverjom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a500.21>baztr, sem kunnaztr es. En svá dýrðleger menn sem þeir hafa <anchor id=a500.22>vereð aller, þá es þat þó eitt sér, hverso Þorlákr hefer sik til búet <anchor id=a500.23>byscops tignar langt frá því sem aller aðrer: hann varð-veitte sik <anchor id=a501.1><pb id=pb501 n=501><note place=margin>[300: 31.]</note>í hrein-lífe alla æve; ok sýndesc hann allan sínn alldr lastvarlega <anchor id=a501.2>lifa með lítilæte ok allz-háttar ráðvende. Hann vas vígðr þegar á <anchor id=a501.3>barns-aldre enom smærom vígslom hverja efter aðra, þar til at <anchor id=a501.4>hann vas prestr sem fyrst þótte mega fyr alldrs sakar. En es hann <anchor id=a501.5>vas prestr, þá gafsc hann Alm&aoacute;tkom Goðe under reglo-hald, ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a501.6>vas hann þá vígðr til canoca; efter þat til priors; en síðan til <anchor id=a501.7>ábóta. Nú má siá hverso virzc hefer yfer-boðonom, ok enom <anchor id=a501.8>vitroztom m&aolig;nnom þeim es bazta for-si&aoacute; kunno, at vígja hann <anchor id=a501.9>&aolig;llom vígslom þeim es til l&aoacute;go; þvi at svá varð-veitte hann vel <anchor id=a501.10>hvern vígslo-pallenn, at enge þótte annarr til an auka hans vígslor<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a501.11>æ meðan þær vóro til. En vær vættom<note place=apparatus id=an501.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vættom]</ab> væntom, B.</note> þó meðr Goðs miskunn at <anchor id=a501.12>nú skyle hans tign hafa mest aukezc, sem hann es frá oss kallaðr <anchor id=a501.13>til eilífrar sælo ok dýrðar með Goðe. En svá kunner sem oss ero <anchor id=a501.14>marger hans góðer siðer, þá mego vær treglega at oss geta, at <anchor id=a501.15>g&oelig;ra efter því sem boðet es, at vér skylem á engiss mannz ráð<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a501.16>gl&oelig;ggva dóma leggja. En svá miket traust h&aolig;fom ver á hans <anchor id=a501.17>verðleikom, at ek ugge, at fáer mone vánar-menn vesa ef hann es <anchor id=a501.18>eigi full-sæll, svá sem ver vitom hann ó-<hi>g</hi>líkastan veret hafa &aolig;llom <anchor id=a501.19>m&aolig;nnom &aolig;ðrom í síno góðlífe.&rsquo;

<p><anchor id=a501.20>M&aolig;rg orð &aolig;nnor vitrleg talaðe Giz&oelig;rr í síno mále, en enge<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a501.21>þau at meirr hafe sýnt hans speke ok rétt-sýne, an þesse sem <anchor id=a501.22>nú vóro s&aolig;gð, ok raun es á orðen.

<pb id=pb502 n=502><note place=margin>[300, 127: 31, 1.]</note>

<p n=15.1><anchor id=a502.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> Morg tíðende urðo á þeim fimtán vetrom, es Þorlákr <anchor id=a502.2>vas byscop í Scála-holte, í andláte ríkra manna. <anchor id=a502.3>Þá andaðesc Erlingr iarl, ok Magnús konongr, son hans; Valdemarr <anchor id=a502.4>konongr; Heinrekr Englannz konongr; Eirikr iarl; Eysteinn <anchor id=a502.5>erki-byscop. Þá varð ok orrosta á Ílo-v&aolig;llom ...<note place=apparatus id=an502.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> The ensuing battles, Northness 1181 and Sogn 1184, are missing.</note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=15.2><anchor id=a502.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þesser dó Íslenzker menn: Bi&aolig;rn ábóte frá Þver-&aoacute;; Káre <anchor id=a502.7>ábóte; Ogmundr ábóte; Hallr ábóte; ok marger aðrer kenne-menn <anchor id=a502.8>ok virðinga-menn, bæðe her á lande ok annars-staðar.

<p><anchor id=a502.9>Staðar-mennener ok lannz-folket víða h&aolig;rmoðo miok andlát ens <anchor id=a502.10>sæla Þorláks byscops, þvi at þeir ætloðo hann meirr skilðan við<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a502.11>mennena an nú er reynt, þvi <hi>at</hi> aldri hafðe upp komet helge né <anchor id=a502.12>iarteiner nockors mannz á Íslande [fyr] an Þorláks byscops, en þó <anchor id=a502.13>vóro marger menn huggaðer af þeckilegom draumom, þar til es <anchor id=a502.14>Guð birte verðleika hans framar. En þó stóð til mikels hallæres ok <anchor id=a502.15>áfelles, byscopenn einn í landeno, ok þó af-gamall; en þá hófsc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a502.16>ó-friðr Norðanlannz.<note place=apparatus id=an502.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Staðar-mennener ... Norðanlannz]</ab> instead of the last §, St.</note>


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=en.thorlaks lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head><hi rend=sc>The Story of Bishop Thorlac.</hi></head>

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> In the days when pope Anacletus [II] ruled God&apos;s Christendom, and Magnus Sigurd&apos;s son and Harold Gille[-christ] were kings of Norway, there was born in a part of Iceland that is called Fleet-lithe, Thor-lac the holy, at the farm that is called Lithe-end, in the year when bishop Thor-lac Runolf&apos;s son died [1133].

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Their names were the same, not because he was called after bishop Thor-lac, but rather because He, that knoweth and governeth all things, wished to do honour withal to the former bishop Thor-lac, that his name might be ever loved and worshipped by all them that have since been permitted to hear and know the worth of the blessed bishop Thor-lac. And Almighty God has vouchsafed to the blessed bishop&apos;s name that honour, which Solomon the Sage said aforetime that &lsquo;a good name is better than much riches&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:prov 22:1">Prov. xxii. 1</xref>], and that was truly a good name then, since it was hallowed by holy baptism and afterwards blessed by the bishoply honour. The proverb is proved true that &lsquo;a wise man&apos;s words will come to pass,&rsquo; for this name hath now become better than <pb id=pb459a n=459>much gold to them that call on him in their need. And this which holy writ saith in another place, that &lsquo;better is a good name than precious ointment&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:eccl 7:2">Eccles. vulg. vii. 2</xref>], hath come true no whit less in this matter, inasmuch as it is now often proven by trial that sickness is ofttimes speedily cured by calling upon his name, that could never be healed before by any ointment or any of the medicines that had been taken or tried before.

<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> The father of Thor-lac was Thor-hall, and his mother Halla. They were well thought of and of good parts. He was a merchantman before he set up housekeeping, and she was a thrifty and thoughtful woman. They were both of good family, and come of gentle kin. And it is now made manifest that God hath fairly fulfilled to us that which he promised by the mouth of David the prophet, that &lsquo;the generation of the righteous shall be blessed&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ps 111:2">Ps. vulg. cxi. 2</xref>], and it is manifest that this hath now been fairly fulfilled and shown forth in the life of the blessed bishop Thor-lac. The nearest kinsfolk of Thor-lac were upright and honest of life; of calls upon them they had many, but of means not enough. Thor-lac was yet young in years when they broke up their household, his father and mother.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He was unlike most young men in bringing up, gentle and genial in all things, obedient and obliging to every one, silent and self-restrained in all his ways, clever and quick at learning even in his young years. He got the psalter by heart before the household of his father and mother <pb id=pb460a n=460>were parted; but he had little other book-learning at first, nevertheless he was already so thoughtful in his young years that many wise men noticed it. But although he had not much learning as a child, yet in all his ways it looked as if he had well-nigh learnt all that which might make him a better man than before. He never set his mind on play or vain pleasures, he was easy and even-tempered, and early made it manifest in his conversation that he meant to take to heart those wholesome admonitions which David teacheth in the psalter, that a man should &lsquo;turn from evil and do good, seek peace, and pursue it&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ps 33:15">Ps. vulg. xxxiii. 15</xref>].

<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> When his mother saw from his wisdom, by God&apos;s providence, how goodly a clerk Thor-lac might become through his good conversation, if only he could get on with his learning, then his mother and he betook themselves to the highest chief-place in Ord under the hands of priest Eyjolf, Sæ-mund&apos;s son, who had both great chiefship and good learning, goodness and wisdom in greater measure than most other men. And we have heard the blessed Thor-lac bear this witness of him&mdash;that he had hardly ever found a man so good as he was, and he made it to be seen afterwards that he would not let those wholesome admonitions with respect to his master pass by him, which the blessed apostle Paul gave to his disciples, when he spake thus to them that heard him, &lsquo;Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:1cor 11:1">1 Cor. xi. 1</xref>]. Insomuch that it often happened when we were praising his good conversation that he would say, &lsquo;those were the ways of Eyjolf Sæ-mund&apos;s son,&rsquo; his <pb id=pb461a n=461>foster-father. And he did right in this to give him such honour in his speech, for he had him to thank for this.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Eyjolf prized Thor-lac most of all his disciples, in all that pertained to clerkship, because he could see from his wisdom and behaviour, as was afterwards proved indeed, that he would surpass them all in these things, as is told later.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Thor-lac took orders already in his youth, as far as becoming deacon, at the hands of bishop Magnus, and he was fifteen years old when that bishop died. And his orders were taken so soon, because his superiors perceived that he took to heart himself, and observed to the utmost the duties that are required of each order of those that he took. And his learning and his orders did not proceed so fast, but that he forestalled with regular application all those qualities which are needed by those orders. He took to heart, when his learning was lighter and his orders lesser, what bishop Isidore spake, a wise and holy man, that &lsquo;it is profitable both to learn much and to live uprightly, but if a man may not do both, then it is more blessed to live well.&rsquo; He also observed, that though the lesser orders rather brought with them lowliness and service than great honour of worldly esteem, yet he kept all those qualities which the smaller offices required after he was raised to the higher degrees of office and honour by [taking] the greater orders.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> It was his habit when he was young in years to keep long hours at his book and to be oftentimes writing, but betweenwhiles he would <pb id=pb462a n=462>be at his prayers, and when he had no task in hand, he would learn what his mother could teach him&mdash;genealogies and stories of <hi>great</hi> men.

<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> When bishop Magnus was dead for some time there was no bishop at Scal-holt, and there came to be a lack of clerks. It was then men&apos;s advice that bishop Beorn should be asked to hold consecrations at the All-moot, and he listened to their prayer, and it was then that Thor-lac was ordained priest and many other clerks with him. But when he was a priest and himself took up the rule and maintenance of the offices [of the church], it was then speedily made manifest how careful and considerate he would be about the hours <hi>or</hi> services, and all else that was required of him in those orders which he had then taken. Moreover he persevered in the same lowliness of life as before, and took upon himself when the first six months were past a small paid cure <hi>or</hi> business, and held it somewhile, and it turned out well both as regards money and good report, so that well-nigh every child that was about him loved him. And many good ensamples shown forth have made manifest in the blessed bishop Thor-lac what hath seldom been apparent in many other men, to wit, that he was both young and old at once, young of years and old of wit. Moreover he was clad about with many good qualities, and most of all with them of which David saith that clerks lay in most need, <hi>to wit</hi>, that they should &lsquo;be clothed with salvation and judgment&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ps 132:9">Ps. vulg. cxxxii. 9</xref>], and this he showed forth afterwards in <pb id=pb463a n=463>all his life, so that whatever he had to do went well-nigh never amiss to him, and all they that were about him profited thereby.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But when this had gone on for some time, and he was now well furnished with money, he was minded to go abroad, for he wished to see the ways of other good men, and he journeyed from Iceland; but there is nothing told of his journeys until he came to Paris, and was there at school as long as he thought needful to get the knowledge which he wished to get there. Thence he came to England, and was at Lincoln, and there he gat moreover great knowledge, and fraught with blessings both to himself and others. And now he had much more good to put forth in his teaching than he had before, for before he was hardly so well stocked with knowledge as he was now.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> But when he had been six years [c. 1155&ndash;61] out of Iceland, then he went back to his kindred and his foster-land, and his kinsmen and his foster-brethren welcomed him back and all his loving friends, but especially his mother and sisters, for they had the greatest longing for him, and they would have suffered most if ought had happened to prevent his return.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> His mother was with him continually after he came back from abroad, and he gave a loving maintenance to his two sisters, Ragn-eid the mother of Paul, who was afterwards bishop after bishop Thor-lac, and Ey-wara, and he had a very long trial by reason of their conversation, which was not after his mind. Nevertheless it all came <pb id=pb464a n=464>to a good ending at the last by the mercy of God and by the good mediation of them that were concerned and their own good will.

<p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> He showed the same lowliness or more when he came back from his journeying abroad as he had done before, for he had not brought back with him any show or worldly glory as many other men do who bring back less profit and good fortune from their journey than he had done. It is also the wont of many that they array themselves more finely in weapons and wear when they come home from their journeys, for they get a greater choice of such things abroad than they have had the chance of before. But Thor-lac kept, as the fruits of his journeying, learning and lowliness and many good habits, which he perceived in many good men abroad in his journeys, bishops and other learned and righteous men that came most near to them that lived in that age when God&apos;s Christendom first arose and [those by whom it] afterwards waxed great.

<p n=4.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Thor-lac was with his kinsfolk some winters at this time, and had a very good livelihood withal, and many wise men that were about him saw that he was still better endowed in many great and good qualities that were of much moment than he was before he went abroad.

<p n=4.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> But after no long time had passed Thor-lac&apos;s kinsmen urged him to establish his condition somewhat more firmly than it was then, and especially they wished him to take a wife. They thought that they could see that he was a thrifty man, and a good householder in every <pb id=pb465a n=465>way. But God&apos;s Christendom had long grown strong and mighty, and the discipline of clerks had increased by reason of restrictions, albeit it was not at that time greatly censured by his superiors if a priest took a widow to wife, though it is now forbidden. And at that time those women in that part of the country who were thought to be the best matches were widows. And Thor-lac, having been egged on to take this counsel, went forth with his kinsmen to the homestead that is named Have, meaning to ask for the hand of the worshipful widow that lived there, and they were received there with a very good will. But when they fell asleep after good cheer that same night, there appeared unto Thor-lac in a dream a man of a noble countenance and seemly raiment, saying, &lsquo;What was your errand hither if ye might get it sped?&rsquo; Thor-lac answered, &lsquo;I do not know what it will be,&rsquo; says he. Then he that appeared unto him in the dream spake. &lsquo;I know well,&rsquo; said he, &lsquo;that thou hast in mind to ask to wife the lady here; but do thou not open this matter, because it shall not speed, and there is another bride much higher in store for thee, and thou shalt take none other to thee but her.&rsquo; And when he had said this he disappeared out of sight; but Thor-lac awoke, and he was now so turned away from the business [he was come on] that he never would ask for any woman&apos;s hand. They went away, and he and the lady were good friends all their lives after. But his kinsmen thought it somewhat strange that he should be so changeable in this matter before they knew what had happened, but when they knew it then they were all content. After all this that had <pb id=pb466a n=466>happened his heart was nevertheless not kindled to pride, though it had been manifested to him by God in a vision that he meant him for another end than that which his kinsmen had made out for him and he himself set his mind to: but rather he exercised himself ever the more in lowliness, according to the example of all the best men, that have been ever the more lowly of heart as they have gone up higher in God&apos;s sight, according to the wholesome admonition of Almighty God, when he speaketh thus, &lsquo;Whosoever is lowly he shall be exalted&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 23:12">Matt. xxiii. 12</xref>], and &lsquo;Take example by me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest for your souls&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 11:29">Matt. xi. 29</xref>]. And when he had not long gone on in this way it was shown forth speedily what he had set his heart upon.



<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> In those days there ruled over that homestead in Side that is called Kirkby, a noble clerk whose name was Bearn-hedin, and he was a most worshipful man according to the judgment of all people. He was a wise man and well favoured, free-handed and of very fair speech, lenient, and well learned. And when they came to hear of each other, he and Thor-lac, then each of them yearned for communion with the other; and God, who is wont to grant righteous men their lawful desires, granted it to them, and Thor-lac went over to stay at Kirkby, and he was there six winters together, and they got experience there of what God saith, namely, &lsquo;My yoke is easy and my burden is light&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 11:30">Matt. xi. 30</xref>].

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And this was both because a strong pair of yoke-fellows were put <pb id=pb467a n=467>under the yoke, and also it was a light draught for them, because they took upon themselves to bear well-nigh all the cares of all the people that dwelt in that country-side near them. And they dealt so with them that were in their charge as to take off the heavy burdens that had been laid upon them by offences and evil-speaking against God and good men and by indulgence to the Fiend, and lay upon them instead God&apos;s burdens light and lenient with gentle shrifts and easy penances. They fitted to themselves in a mark-worthy way the names which Almighty God [gives to his servants when he] calls his apostles &lsquo;the light of the world&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 5:14">Matt. v. 14</xref>], inasmuch as they shed a light upon the path of mercy that leadeth to everlasting joy, both by their noble teaching in words and in their precious examples. It might be seen by their daily conversation that that was seldom out of their mind which God spake to his disciples: &lsquo;Let your light so shine before men,&rsquo; he said, &lsquo;that they may learn your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 5:16">Matt. v. 16</xref>]. And it appeared to them that were with them that there was well-nigh no hour but somewhat good might not be gleaned from them. They were moreover so set together in like behaviour and likemindedness towards good, as Luke saith of God&apos;s apostles, that it might be thought they &lsquo;had but one heart and one soul&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:acts 4:32">Acts iv. 32</xref>]. So that it spread abroad over the country-side how unlike they were to most men in their behaviour. And now it began to be the common speech of wise men that there would be no more likely quarter to look towards than that where they were, if a man were ever needed <pb id=pb468a n=468>for the highest office in Iceland, and this was not misjudged, as was proved later.



<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> The owner of the second best homestead in that country, which was named Thick-by, was a man named Thor-kell the son of Geire, a wealthy man of possessions and wise of understanding. And when he began to be stricken somewhat in years, and had no very near kinsman to take the heritage after him, then he gave a comfortable portion to his kinsfolk, and kept free for himself at his own disposal what was left, a great and fair estate. And then he declared that he wished to choose Christ and his saints as heirs of all that was left, and that he wished to raise up a seat for canons in Thick-by. Howbeit this matter was hard to put into effect at first, wherefore he sought at first to get hold of that which was the hardest to get&mdash;a man that might establish the rule which they, that wished to turn to a pure life there, were to keep. And now he went to Kirk-by and called on Thor-lac to undertake it. And he was not very hard to persuade, because he had already had it in his heart to put off the world and come under rule [i. e. be canon or monk], according to the words of Almighty God when he declareth that &lsquo;no man can be wholly his disciple save he forsake all that he hath for God&apos;s sake, and serveth him afterward with a pure heart&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 19:21">Matt. xix. 21</xref>]. Nevertheless he opened the matter to Bearn-hedin the priest, asking him how he looked on it, or what appeared to him best to do, whether he should consent to take up the office to which he was called. But Bearn-hedin <pb id=pb469a n=469>said that it would be a heavy day for him when Thor-lac left Kirk-by; but yet he said that he could not find it in him to hinder him much therefrom, because he saw that the salvation of many folk hung upon it. And so there was an endowment made at Thick-by by the counsel and advice of bishop Clong and all the men of the hundred, and Thor-lac moved thither, and there was established a House of Canons [regular].

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But that day when Thor-lac went forth at the last out of Kirk-by, the whole of the people accompanied him out of the garth, and they felt it grievously to part with him. And when Bearn-hedin came home again, entering the hall, he looked at Thor-lac&apos;s seat, and spake with great earnestness, saying, that that was a seat that would never be so well filled again unless he himself sat there again. And it was Thor-lac&apos;s wont to say all his life after, which was a great credit to the estate and to them that held it, that he had never been so happy before as he was those six winters he was at Kirk-by. Many great commendations have fallen to this place, but this was the greatest, for it may most likely be believed that that must have been a good place above others which he esteemed the best.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Thor-lac was full thirty-five years old [1168] when he moved to Wer, and there he was seven winters. He first took the orders of a canon, and then was the first prior set over the canons that were there, and he ordered their life so fairly, that it was the verdict of wise men that they had nowhere seen such a good way of life, where there had been a regular [canonical] life established, so short a time as there.

<pb id=pb470a n=470><p n=6.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> And after that bishop Clong hallowed Thor-lac as abbot of Wer, and then he began afresh to rule in a wonderful way over the brethren whom he was set over. He bade them to maintain love and unity among themselves, and laid before them how great gain there was therein, seeing what the Son of God saith that &lsquo;wheresoever two or three should be gathered in His name, he would be in the midst of them&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 18:20">Matt. xviii. 20</xref>]. Above all he was most zealous on their behalf, and they were well cared for in every way.

<p n=6.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Halla, Thor-lac&apos;s mother, was with him all his life, as long as she was alive, but he had given both his sisters their portions before he entered upon the regular life. He was loving to all his kinsfolk afterward as before, and a ghostly father to all them that he was set over. He forbade the brethren roaming abroad, and every journey for which there was no necessity, and bade them to be steadfast in good works at their duties, according to the teaching of the apostle Paul in his epistle [<xref url="bib:1thess 5:17-18">1 Thess. v. 17, 18</xref>], &lsquo;Pray without ceasing,&rsquo; saith he, &lsquo;and give God thanks in all things.&rsquo; Moreover the Son of God himself saith, &lsquo;Holpen is he that is steadfast in good deeds even unto the end of his life&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 24:13">Matt. xxiv. 13</xref>]. He bade them to keep strict silence, when it was required, but to hold good conversation when speech was allowed them, for according to the words of the apostle Paul, &lsquo;Evil communications,&rsquo; saith he, &lsquo;corrupt good manners&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:1cor 15:33">1 Cor. xv. 33</xref>]. And it must be manifest how needful it is in this [course of] life to keep oneself from worldly and wicked words, if it even be wrong to speak good words <pb id=pb471a n=471>when it is enjoined that there be silence, as David saith in the Psalter [<xref url="bib:ps 38:3">Ps. vulg. xxxviii. 3</xref>], &lsquo;I am lowly,&rsquo; saith he, &lsquo;and I kept silence even in a good matter.&rsquo; He thought himself a lowly man because he was ever more ready to speak good than evil, but yet he often refrained from both for God&apos;s sake.

<p n=6.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Men used to go to this house of Canons of abbot Thor-lac from other minsters and houses of regulars, both men of this land and aliens, to see and copy the good customs there, and every one that went there bore witness that they had never been to any place where there was such a fair life led as there according to the ordinances of Thor-lac. And then for the first time many men perceived that there was great good to be looked for where he was by reason of his holy life, beyond what could be worked by other men. Many men went away whole from his presence when he had given them his blessing and chanted over them, that had come with divers ailments to him.

<p n=6.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Many things also took place about him, which many men at once took to be miracles. This thing came to pass when he was at ... to wit, that fire broke out in the house, but as soon as Thor-lac came up and blessed it the fire was quenched. If any live stock fell sick, they always began to mend as soon as he had chanted over them, if there were any life in them. His hallowing of water was mark-worthy insomuch that both men and cattle gat amendment [of their ills] thereby. If water, that Thor-lac had hallowed, was sprinkled over cattle, then well-nigh never did they take harm by sickness, or weather, or wild beasts. If mice were doing any harm to meat or clothes, there would arise <pb id=pb472a n=472>a plague among them, or they would all disappear before the water if it were sprinkled about, and if all were done as he gave orders. This holy water soon got to be taken about over all the neighbourhood, and, after Thor-lac was bishop, over all Iceland, for everywhere men thought that they could perceive they got good thereby in that wherein they were in most need. Nevertheless wise men walked warily with regard to those things, whether it were in calling these things plain miracles or in interpreting it as [proceeding from] his particular sanctity, for so saith Holy Writ, &lsquo;Thou shalt not praise a man in his lifetime, praise him after his life and magnify him according to the reward of his life&rsquo; [cp. <xref url="bib:eccl 4:2">Eccl. iv. 2</xref>], and this was spoken to this end, that it may lead to assurance, both in them that speak before the end of a man&apos;s life is known to the full, and it may also be that such speech may entice the heart of the man himself into something of pride. And it is now made manifest how well it hath turned out that men followed these wholesome admonitions in this case, namely, in there being few that praised him overmuch in his life. But now do ye praise and make much of him in every way that ye be able, for ye know his worth and his saintliness!



<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Now when the behaviour and life of the holy Thor-lac was shining with such bloom of purity and goodness of life, and seemly prudence with regard to the lives of others as hath but now been told, Almighty God began to prepare the way for that which he already intended, namely, that his honour might be strengthened and increase beyond what it then was. And it came about in this way&mdash;

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> When bishop Clong was getting far stricken in years, he took a great illness, so that his feet broke out into sores, and he became <pb id=pb473a n=473>very unable to do his office by reason of his illness. And he had already gotten leave of archbishop Ey-stan for this, to have a man chosen to be bishop after him. Wherefore bishop Clong went to the All-moot and required of his friends that a man should be chosen to go abroad [to be hallowed bishop], and meetings were appointed therefore. That same summer, as if he had been sent thither by God, abbot Thor-lac came to the All-moot upon some business which he thought needful to do there, for he was never wont to leave home save it were for some business that needed it. When the discourse began about this matter, there were three more named for choice to be made from, who were thought to be best fitted therefore of all men. And one of them was abbot Thor-lac; the second abbot was named Ogmund, a paragon of men. The third was a priest named Paul, a man of great learning and a very great householder. There was fair testimony borne to each of them, and every one was most eager that he whom he happened to know best should be chosen. But this was made known in Thor-lac&apos;s case that he had not puffed himself up with that pride that is called self-conceit, and that he showed forth his good works in the face of God rather than of men, and strove rather to be better than other men in righteousness than merely to seem so before the eyes of foolish men. And therefore it was, that to many he seemed to be the least known of those which the choice was to be made from. And this was to be excused, because he had not been a very near neighbour to many folk as far as his country and his dwelling-place went. Thor-lac was of few words at these meetings, but many others, who had much less to do with the matter than he, were <pb id=pb474a n=474>wordy enough. It was inquired of Thor-kel Geireson, who was well approved for his truthfulness, and who of all wise and noble men was best acquainted with Thor-lac, what were Thor-lac&apos;s gifts, and whether he was a good speaker. But Thor-kel answered, &lsquo;Thor-lac takes pains rather to do best than speak most.&rsquo; This answer was to men&apos;s liking, and many straightway began to favour Thor-lac the more heartily, when they heard such worthy witness borne to his qualities by such a wise man and one of such judgment. The end of the matter was, that the choice was given to bishop Clong to choose one of them that had been picked out: and he chose Thor-lac to go out and to take his bishopric after him, and all the duties that appertained thereto. On Peter&apos;s mass-day [June 29, 1174] bishop Clong chose Thor-lac to be bishop, and he wished straightway to hand over to him all the governance of the estates. But when the choice had fallen upon the holy abbot Thor-lac, he said that it had come upon him unawares, and declared that he had not refused to be one of them picked out, but other men whom he declared to be best fitted to the office might have less inducement to excuse themselves [from standing]. He excused himself much, and said that he himself was not at all well fitted to this office and dignity. But he could say nought that availed against the appeal and eagerness of the people, and all the more as he suspected even then that it was God&apos;s will, as indeed afterwards it proved to be, wherefore he at last consented to the choice that was made.

<p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> The lord abbot Thor-lac went back from the Moot to his house <pb id=pb475a n=475>of Canons, and prayed bishop Clong that he would keep the governance of the see and of the estate till the next season <hi>or</hi> the winter over. And at that time the estate at Scal-holt began to be in a bad way, for the outgoings were great and the income small, and the bishop was unable to go on his visitations, wherefore all fees ceased, and it could not go on to the end of the year without the need of some greater supply [than was in store].

<p n=7.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> After Yule men were sent from Scal-holt to fetch the bishop-elect, and he started from the east at Lent, and with him John Loft&apos;s son, who was in those days the greatest chief in Iceland; and they came to the estate at Scal-holt half a month before Easter [1175], and Gizor Hall&apos;s son was already there. There were also other men there who were the friends of the bishop, and the chief men of the country-side. Then Thor-lac took up the governance of the estate, and there was straightway a great debt run up for those things that there was need of which the place required. And he had forthwith great trials [to undergo], both in dealings with them that were there, and other unpleasantnesses which he had to put up with, but he bore them all patiently.

<p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Bishop Clong lay in bed very weak, and Thor-lac abode at Scal-holt, because men would not let him go abroad by reason of the broken peace that was at that time between Norway and Iceland, for there were cases unsettled which had arisen between the two lands by reason of manslaughters and robberies, wherefore he remained for certain winters. But when bishop Clong was dead [Feb. 28, 1176], it came to this, that he thought it needful that there should be no longer the lack <pb id=pb476a n=476>of a bishop in Scal-holt, as it was now. Then he would not let his journey be stayed any longer. And it was of no avail though he were dissuaded from his journey by reason of the broken peace. He took example by the word of Paul the apostle, &lsquo;Ye shall not be afraid for the threatening of the wicked,&rsquo; said he [cp. <xref url="bib:heb 13:6">Heb. xiii. 6</xref>]. And after this he made ready, but would take but little money with him in comparison with what others had taken before him, and no great following, and he had a fair voyage until they came to Norway.



<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> When Thor-lac the bishop-elect came to archbishop Ey-stan, he received him wonderfully well, and soon let it be known that he would cheerfully do all on his part that he thought needful, save that he would not give him the office of bishop without he got the king&apos;s consent. A father and son at that time held rule over Norway&mdash;king Magnus and earl Erling his father&mdash;and they entertained Thor-lac&apos;s case very unwillingly, and from this quarter there came angry words rather than easement to the end that neither men nor goods should be untouched [i. e. that an embargo should be laid on Thor-lac and his men, and they themselves attached]. But Thor-lac made light of this, and showed that all his heart was there, as [David] teacheth in the Psalter [<xref url="bib:ps 118:8">Ps. vulg. cxvii. 8</xref>], &lsquo;It is better to trust in the Lord than in princes,&rsquo; wherefore he let the matter pass by him. But the archbishop felt himself to be in great jeopardy, for he wished to love both, and he also wished to observe that which Peter the apostle teacheth in his epistle: &lsquo;Fear God,&rsquo; saith he, &lsquo;and honour the king&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:1pt 2:17">1 Peter ii. 17</xref>]. <pb id=pb477a n=477>And it was made manifest throughout that he wished to satisfy both in this matter, and now the archbishop mediated between them and other men of good will; and it came about that the king and the earl consented that Thor-lac should take bishop&apos;s orders, and there was brought about a show of friendship between them, and they gave each other gifts before they parted. And king Swerre hath oftentimes said, who was both a man of weighty speech and of wise judgment, that all things went smoothly for that father and son both in battle and well-nigh all else, when there was friendship between them, and Thor-lac was out there in Norway.

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Thor-lac was hallowed bishop by archbishop Ey-stan in the days of pope Alexander [III], three nights after the passion of the apostles Peter and Paul [July 2, 1178]. There was present at the consecration Eiric, bishop of Staf-anger, who was afterwards archbishop in Thrond-ham, after archbishop Ey-stan. The third [including the archbishop] that was present at the consecration of bishop Thor-lac was Paul, bishop of Bergen, a paragon of men, and a friend of bishop Thor-lac all his life after. Bishop Thor-lac was but a short while with the archbishop after he had received consecration, because he knew very well what desire there was for his return to Iceland to the sheep over whom he had been appointed [pastor].

<p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And when bishop Thor-lac had departed from the presence of the archbishop, the other bishops that were with him asked him what he <pb id=pb478a n=478>thought of bishop Thor-lac. He said that he thought he had never consecrated a bishop whom he thought his peer in all the qualities that a bishop ought to have, as the apostle Paul saith in his epistle which he sent to Titus: &lsquo;A bishop should be,&rsquo; saith he, &lsquo;blameless and of good learning, of simple life and no drunkard, a free giver and not greedy, sage and sober, a lover of good and given to hospitality, righteous in his life and of good report, a pure liver and prudent, trusty and truthful, open-handed and out-spoken, loving to all men but a rebuker to transgressors&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:tit 1:7-8">Tit. i. 7, 8</xref>]. And it is manifest that to have these gifts is the mark of a holy man. &lsquo;And I cannot show you better how wise his ways have appeared to me,&rsquo; said the archbishop, &lsquo;than by saying that I would like to live my last day as I see him live every day.&rsquo; And thereby it is manifest how wise and clear-sighted he must have been by this opinion of his about the beloved bishop Thor-lac.

<p n=8.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac went down to take ship with his followers, and when they were well-nigh ready to sail the shipmen loaded the ship till she would hardly swim with the loose [deck] timber, and two boats that they lashed outside the bulwarks. Then the bishop went ashore out of the ship and told the shipmen that he thought she was overladen. Then answered one of them whose name was Macan, &lsquo;Thou hast no share in the ship,&rsquo; said he, &lsquo;and thou shalt not say how she shall be loaded.&rsquo; The bishop answered, &lsquo;I forbid you in God&apos;s name,&rsquo; said he, &lsquo;to load her to the sinking point, and I charge you with the lives of all them that <pb id=pb479a n=479>journey with you.&rsquo; Then the bishop went aboard again, and they put to sea with her as she was. And when they were come hard by Iceland there came up a great gale, and gat great damage, the halyard parted and the sail was carried away overboard. Nearly all of them were minded to make vows [for safety], but bishop Thor-lac said that they should not make vows till they had cast overboard some of their lading. And when it was cast overboard as the bishop wished, immediately the gale abated and they made land the next day, and bishop Thor-lac came home to Scal-holt [Aug. 9, 1178], the day before Lawrence-mass-day.



<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Men were very fain of his home-coming, and he straightway began to take up the quiet rule of those things that came before him with power and zeal. Nevertheless he kept closely to all the rules of the canonry that he could comply with now that he was become a bishop, both as to the fashion of his garments and in vigils and fasts and prayers. He began to order anew the ways of the household and customs of the house, which order of his endured all his days in many ways.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac gave the most love and affection to those priests and clerks that lived soberly and kept their orders somewhat according to the rules thereof, and these he duly prized and established them fairly [i. e. gave them good livings] as far as the means [of the see] allowed. But those clerks that lived less soberly and observed their orders less carefully, he admonished them with kindly ordinances to do <pb id=pb480a n=480>better, and turn their paths aright and the ways of those that they had to care for. But they that did not change for his gentle admonitions he rebuked with strong compulsions and gentle penances, as the apostle Paul taught Timothy [<xref url="bib:2tim 4:2">2 Tim. iv. 2</xref>]: &lsquo;Thou shalt admonish, exhort and rebuke, with all long-suffering and doctrine.&rsquo;

<p n=9.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> He took great care of the estates of the see, and would ever make able men stewards, so that he might be the most free himself from those cares; but yet that the income of the estates might flourish according to what was possible, but yet so that all might be provided that there was need of. And he managed his income so wisely that all wise men straightway fell to saying how good was the order he kept in all matters.

<p n=9.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> But no matter how great care he gave to the ordering of all that touched his income so that all might go in the best way, yet he gave his best thought to all that touched the Church, and that the clergy should be chosen from among the best in all ways, and along with this he took care of the way that the clergy did all their services, and taught them lovingly all the duties that they were bound to fulfil according to their several orders.

<p n=9.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> He made a form of confession for the use of all the clergy in his diocese [Dipl. Isl. i. p. 240], so that all might order it one way. And he bade all men go to shrift once every twelve-month at least; and all they that served at the altar, if they fell into any capital sin, he bade <pb id=pb481a n=481>confess themselves every time before they touched God&apos;s service or sung mass.

<p n=9.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> He used to gather together the clergy home to him at Scal-holt at the great feasts, and then he would tell them what each man ought to do so that everything that each was bound to do should go fairly forward in God&apos;s sight. And the more zealous he was with regard to other men, yet ever he did best of all himself, so that every one could distinguish what he did from what all the rest of the clergy did, so finely did he prepare all the services in God&apos;s sight, so that it was a joy to see and give ear thereto.

<p n=9.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac often preached sermons, and this was a great trial to him, for he was slow and hindered of speech, but his words were so sweet and so well put together that it must needs come into the mind of them that listened to his sermons how David speaketh in the Psalter: &lsquo;O Lord, Thy words are sweeter in my throat than honey and than honeycomb in my mouth&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ps 119:103">Ps. cxix. 103</xref>]. These same words of God bishop Thor-lac put forth also in his life with such fair ensamples as that there could scarcely be found such goodly ones in the life of any man that was then alive.

<p n=9.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac would keep long vigils by night when other men slept, and he would pray fervently that he might inherit this which God spake: &lsquo;Blessed is that servant,&rsquo; saith He, &lsquo;whom the Lord shall find watching when He cometh to visit him&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 24:46">Matt. xxiv. 46</xref>]. And that is also clearly spoken in the Word of God which He spake Himself: &lsquo;Watch ye,&rsquo; saith He, &lsquo;for ye know not what hour your Lord cometh&rsquo; <pb id=pb482a n=482>[<xref url="bib:mt 24:42">Matt. xxiv. 42</xref>]. And it hath been well proven that Thor-lac must have seldom had these words out of his mind, because that hath now come to him which God promised to them that were sober in watching, that &lsquo;He would set them over all good things&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 24:47">Matt. xxiv. 47</xref>] after this life.

<p n=9.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> The holy bishop Thor-lac used much to fast when he was at home in his bishop&apos;s seat, remembering therein what the Lord Himself said in the Gospel, that there is a &lsquo;certain kind of devil that cannot be overcome save by prayer and fasting&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 17:21">Matt. xvii. 21</xref>], and therefore he conformed thereto in his life, wishing to overcome all the wiles of the devils.

<p n=9.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> He comforted them that were sorrowful, and held out to them that which the Lord Himself spake, &lsquo;Blessed are they that mourn now, for they shall be comforted&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 5:4">Matt. v. 4</xref>]; and in another Gospel when He was speaking with His apostles, &lsquo;Your sorrow shall be turned into joy&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:jn 16:20">John xvi. 20</xref>].

<p n=9.11><ab type=parNum>11.</ab> The blessed bishop Thor-lac strove with all earnestness to bring together and make peace between those that were wroth and at enmity with one another, telling them as it was said and as it is true, that wrath blotteth out the righteousness of them she dwelleth with, as James the apostle saith, &lsquo;That the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:jam 1:20">James i. 20</xref>]; and in another place [it is written], &lsquo;Be not overcome of evil, but rather overcome evil with good&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:rom 12:21">Rom. xii. 21</xref>], that is to say, wrath is to be overcome with long-suffering and kindness.

<p n=9.12><ab type=parNum>12.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac was often looking in holy books, and reading in <pb id=pb483a n=483>holy writings, inasmuch as he forgot not that which the apostle John saith in his book [<xref url="bib:rev 22:7">Rev. xxii. 7</xref>], &lsquo;Blessed is he that readeth and heareth the words of these books, and keepeth those things that are written therein.&rsquo; He would often be teaching clerks both to read books and learn what else was useful to them; he perceived how great need there was of good teaching, as David saith in the psalter [<xref url="bib:ps 66:16">Ps. lxvi. 16</xref>], &lsquo;Come hither, O my sons, and hearken unto me, and I will teach you how ye shall fear God.&rsquo;

<p n=9.13><ab type=parNum>13.</ab> He was ever awriting, and always he would be reading holy books, according to the ensamples of the apostle Paul, as he saith in his epistle [<xref url="bib:2cor 1:13">2 Cor. i. 13</xref>], &lsquo;We write none other things unto you than what ye have most need to read and know.&rsquo;

<p n=9.14><ab type=parNum>14.</ab> And whatever else bishop Thor-lac had to do his lips were never silent from the praise of God or from prayer, because he kept in mind what the apostle James saith in his epistle [<xref url="bib:jam 5:16">James v. 16</xref>], &lsquo;The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much with God,&rsquo; and his prayer hath stood in good stead <hi>or</hi> availed much both to himself and many others. The bishop was gentle and meek in all his ordinances, and of wholesome counsel in every matter that he was sought to for: and he hath now entered into that estate which God hath promised them that are that way disposed, where He speaketh in the Gospel, &lsquo;Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the everlasting land of the living&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 5:5">Matt. v. 5</xref>].

<p n=9.15><ab type=parNum>15.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac sang mass every day both to his own and other men&apos;s salvation, remembering continually the passion of the Son of God, <pb id=pb484a n=484>and he hath now thereby received for his service the more fair reward according as he was more frequent and noteworthy in that office than most other men.

<p n=9.16><ab type=parNum>16.</ab> He applied himself greatly to the cherishing of the poor; he used to clothe the cold and feed the hungry, whereby it was easy to see that that never went out of his mind, which is to be looked for on the last day, <hi>namely</hi>, how much it is declared to weigh in the scales what a man shall have done for the poor in this life. And he did this over and above what other good men had done before him, in that he would have poor folk called together at the greatest feasts, twelve or nine, or seven or five, and would go in secretly where they were and wash their feet, and wipe them with his hair, and give each of them some good alms ere he went away. And this he did rather after the example of God than of men, for He washed the feet of His apostles, and afterwards let Himself suffer for the salvation of all mankind. Moreover the Son of God spake thus when He had washed His apostles&apos; feet, &lsquo;Do ye after my ensample as I now do to you&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:jn 13:15">John xiii. 15</xref>]. Wherefore the blessed bishop Thor-lac let the washing of feet go before the gift of charity <hi>or</hi> mercy.

<p n=9.17><ab type=parNum>17.</ab> Nor could his dear friends and trusty men keep silence after his departure over a matter they felt they knew of a certain&mdash;<hi>to wit,</hi> that he had a kind of secret penance and work of charity, the knowledge of which he did not trust to any one, as God commandeth, that the &lsquo;left hand should not know what the right hand doeth&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 6:3">Matt. vi. 3</xref>]. And <pb id=pb485a n=485>the bishop&apos;s dear friends dared not afterward to make that more known which he himself wished to be left so hidden <hi>or</hi> secret.



<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac was wont often to have speech with good men and them of a righteous life, to make acquaintance with their ways thereby and strengthen them by his wholesome admonitions, that they might stand fast in their well-doing. He also kept strict watch over the deeds of those men that did not beware of their own sins, in order to lead them back from wrong paths, and call them back into right paths, though they had gone amiss before, according as the Lord spake, &lsquo;I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn to me and live&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ezek 18:32">Ez. xviii. 32</xref>]. This the blessed bishop Thor-lac showed to all that would repent of their faults, and if they would follow his advice, he was then rejoiced, and showed mercy to them with light penances, according as the prophet of God said, &lsquo;That whatever day a man will turn to God that he should then live a good life and die no ill death&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ezek 33:11">Ez. xxxiii. 11</xref>]. But they that would not turn to the right way by his kindly upbraiding, and not forsake their dangerous condition at his rebuke, then he would interdict some, and excommunicate others, according as Christ bade His disciples: &lsquo;Ye shall rebuke your brother lovingly,&rsquo; and &lsquo;if he neglect to hear thee, let him be to thee as a heretic or a heathen&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 18:15-17">Matt, xviii. 15, 17</xref>]. He bore patiently the evil deeds of men, but he grieved greatly at their evil condition, and never consented to the evil conversation of <pb id=pb486a n=486>wicked men, though he was quick to hearken to what God speaketh: &lsquo;Blessed are they that suffer patiently, for they shall be called the sons of God&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:mt 5:9">Matt. v. 9</xref>]. He suffered at men&apos;s disobedience, because he wept at the ghostly wounds of them that were under his charge, as was the way with the apostle Paul with regard to God&apos;s Christendom in his days, that &lsquo;no man suffered or was afflicted,&rsquo; but he felt in himself, &lsquo;in his own body those sufferings by reason of the love he bore them&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:2cor 1:6">2 Cor. i. 6</xref>, paraph.].

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> The holy bishop Thor-lac so used the authority that was given to him when he was consecrated, to bind and loose on God&apos;s behalf the condition of men, that it seemed to wise and righteous men as if there was equal care taken on the one side, that there should be no passion or lack of moderation, yet on the other, that he was never so slack or lenient, though it were a difficult matter to deal with, that it did not savour rather of meekness and mercy, though he were to wait a long time, if it were rightly considered. He let it often come into his mind what David saith, that the &lsquo;Lord loveth mercy and righteousness, and showeth forth glory and loving-kindness&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ps 86:5">Ps. lxxxvi. 5</xref>].

<p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> This is also to be recorded, that bishop Thor-lac loved that place most after Scal-holt which he had adorned with his presence [i.e. Thick-by]. He hallowed as abbot of Wer, God-mund the son of Bialfe, a good man and righteous, open-handed and void of pride. Thor-kell Gar&apos;s son that was spoken of before in this story, went thither under the rule thereof, and kept it well as long as he lived, and died in the ninth year of the bishopric of bishop Thor-lac.

<pb id=pb487a n=487><p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> In the days of bishop Thor-lac it was made law to keep holy Ambrose-day, and Cecil&apos;s-day, and Agnes-day; and to fast the vigils of the Apostles&apos; masses, and Nicholas-mass.  He strictly ordered the Friday fast to be kept in such wise that there should be two meals eaten on no ordinary Friday, save the one that is in Easter-week. He kept Friday so strictly himself that he ate nothing solid if he were well; but he was so lenient and easy in this when he was sick that he would eat white meat on Ember-days and Fridays if he were asked to do so, and these ensamples he gave to men who now would act just so as they hope may seem best in God&apos;s eyes. Bishop Thor-lac was sick while he was bishop on a time when Yule-day fell on Friday [1181, 1187 <hi>or</hi> 1192], and he was in weak health, and he used flesh that day, and showed an example therein that it were better so to do.

<p n=10.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> He took great pains to keep those folks together that were bound in holy wedlock, and laid heavy penalties in fines and shrifts upon them that had made grievous breaches therein. For he thought that it was the greatest offence to God if that indulgence which is the greatest worldly thing He hath given to man, and which He hath made, for His loving-kindness&apos; sake and out of mercy and by reason of the lusts of men, lawful and blessed, which indeed otherwise were a capital sin&mdash;if this indulgence were monstrously disgraced and wrongly abused. And the moneys which some paid for their sin he would never mix with other money, but set them apart, that those households which lived well together but were poor might be enabled thereby to continue in the <pb id=pb488a n=488>same [rather than be parted by poverty], and he would that this might be some further amends and compensation for their faults who had paid their moneys.

<p n=10.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> In his day, bishop Thor-lac broke all those connections which he knew to have been unlawfully made, whether those that had part therein were great or small. He was not able to live in all communion with some [great] men and chiefs, because he would only consent to the doings of those that were right and good. He thought it were a far greater destruction to God&apos;s Christendom if gentle-folks were to be excused in great matters, and he would not show them any more indulgence, when they did not keep themselves from unlawful dealings in this kind, because they had received from God a greater portion of wealth and honour.



<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> Now it is to be told of the every-day habits of the blessed Thor-lac how temperate he was in all good courses. He never spoke a word that did not tend to some good purpose when he was asked anything. He was so wary of his words that he never blamed the weather as many do, or any of those things that are not blameworthy, but which he perceived went according to God&apos;s will. He did not look forward to any day above the rest, nor did he dread any one much, save it were the All-moot and Ember-days&mdash;the All-moot, because he thought that many a man went astray in the cases he had there, even a man of great worship in a matter which he had at heart, <hi>or</hi> thought of great import; <pb id=pb489a n=489>and the Ember-days, because he thought it a great responsibility to consecrate men who had come a long way therefore, but whom he saw to be very poorly fitted therefore, both by reason of their small learning and other conditions not to his liking. Nevertheless he could not find heart to refuse them, both because of their own poverty, and for the sake of them that had presented them or sent their tokens withal; wherefore he would tell every man piece by piece what duty appertained to each order, and handed over the responsibility in the matter to themselves and them that had sent them to be ordained.

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He was so regular in his fasts when he was at home, and in vigils and prayers whether he were at home or not, that it was always to be guessed what he would be doing. He used so little food that one could not but think that he would often put away his food when he had the most desire for it. His way with regard to drink was that one could never see it to have any hold over him, even though he partook of strong drink. But he had such luck with regard to [the brewing of] drink when he was entertaining his friends, that the ale never went bad when he blessed it and made the cross over it with his hand, when it was about to work. He was easy to satisfy and so friendly at feasts when there was drinking that he put up with any kind of drink, no matter how poor if it was not quite bad. But whenever bishop Thor-lac <pb id=pb490a n=490>drank water or other harmless drink, he did it so soberly and with such restraint that he would sip three sips of it or five or seven, and well-nigh never more. Moreover he well-nigh never drank between meals when he was not ill, and there was not a public drinking-feast.

<p n=11.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac was never quite hale during the whole of his bishopric, and this was to be looked for according as Paul the apostle saith, that &lsquo;the strength is made perfect out of sickness&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:2cor 12:9">2 Cor. xii. 9</xref>]. He would let the doctors often perform operations upon him for his ailment, and showed that God had ordained leeches that they might at times by the Lord&apos;s will stop long ills by short pains.

<p n=11.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac kept regular habits in his prayers beyond that of most other men. He used to sing first the <hi lang=la>Credo</hi> and the <hi lang=la>Pater Noster</hi>, after he had crossed himself, and the hymn <hi lang=la>Jesu Nostra Redemptio</hi>, and thereby showed forth straightway that he was ever thinking of that salvation by which God hath ransomed mankind and [<hi>set</hi>] true love between God and men, the desire of everlasting bliss and presence with God, the dread of the judgment-day, and the coming of the Maker to judge all mankind&mdash;all which is proclaimed in this hymn. Then he would sing the Prayer of Gregory while he clad himself, and afterwards the first psalm out of the Psalter, for he never let those wholesome admonitions go out of his head which stands in this psalm: &lsquo;Blessed is he that walketh not after them that be of evil counsel and consenteth not to the evil doing of sinners, and judgeth not wrong judgments, but <pb id=pb491a n=491>ever observeth the laws of God&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ps 1:1-2">Ps. i. 1, 2</xref>]. And when he came to church, he first sung the praise of the Holy Trinity, and afterward he would praise with song those saints to whom the church was hallowed, which he then happened to be in, and whose holy relics were kept there. Then he would read the <hi>Hours of Mary</hi>, and after that he would fall on his face on the ground before the altar, when it was not a holiday, and pray long for the whole Church of God. And every day he sung the third part of the Psalter, beside the chants for the day, whether he were at home or not. And he used to sing more [doxology] between the psalms than other men, for he used first to sing <hi lang=la>Gloria Patri</hi> to the Holy Trinity, and next <hi lang=la>Miserere mei Deus</hi>, and then <hi lang=la>Salvum fac Pater et Domine</hi> for all Christian people. But if there came a difficult case before him, he used to sing the verse wherewith Solomon the wise man prayed to God in his days, <hi lang=la>Mitte mihi, Domine, auxilium de Sancto</hi>, and when he went forth from the table he used to sing <hi lang=la>Benedicam Dominum in omni tempore</hi>; and when he took off his clothes to sleep he sang the psalm wherein the Lord is put in remembrance of His promise that they shall be without fear that keep His counsels righteously, and hurt others neither in word nor work. This psalm is, <hi lang=la>Domine, quis habitabit</hi> [<xref url="bib:ps 14">Ps. xiv</xref>], and it was a great joy to him to keep such customs, for he thought that some one might perchance follow after his habit therein.

<p n=11.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> He took pleasure in stories, and poems, and all songs and lays, and <pb id=pb492a n=492>wise men&apos;s conversation and dreams, and all that good men took pleasure in, save plays, because he thought that such things kept men away from the unprofitable ways of wicked men [wherefore he was beloved by all that were about him].

<p n=11.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac dreamed this dream at the All-moot: he thought he was walking from the church there at the Moot to his booth carrying the head of St. Martin in his arms, but Paul the priest of Reek-holt, a man of worth, read his dream so, that he himself would afterwards bear a holy bishop&apos;s head wherever he went, and it is now manifest to all that this is true.



<p n=12.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> When bishop Thor-lac had been fifteen winters in his see of Scal-holt in the office of a bishop, in the bright bloom of good works, beloved by God and by good men, [but] much wearied by his adversaries and also by manifold ailments, then he declared secretly to certain of them whom he trusted that he was minded to give up the bishopric, saying, that they needed to get a stronger ox under the yoke which he had been set under hitherto, and he himself wished to go back to his house of Canons with lowliness, and serve God and the saints there as long as he lived.

<p>But Almighty God, who had raised him up to the highest place of clerkly office, saw that he might yet be worthy of a glorious reward, even though his honour was not lessened in men&apos;s eyes, wherefore he would not let this come about, but rather prepared for him such <pb id=pb493a n=493>a holy preparation for death as every wise man would chose for himself and his dearest friends.

<p n=12.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac went for the last time round that Quarter which lay nearest to him; and in Borg-frith there came upon him the sickness that brought him to his grave. He came home to the seat of his see with but small strength, and lay abed three months with a troublesome illness all the while, but never great pain; and he was able to pay heed to all things that were of most import to himself and others as well as if he had been a hale man.

<p>There was then staying at Scal-holt Gizor Hall&apos;s son, who was both a wise man and kindly. He came often to see the bishop in his weakness, and strengthened him with many fair histories, both interesting and rare, of the saints, or other good men that had borne their afflictions best in their trials. There came there also many of his friends and kinsmen to see him, and get good counsel from him, and show him their true love with all their heart. Paul, his sister&apos;s son, came to him in his sickness, showing then as before that he was the most loving of all his noble kinsmen.

<p n=12.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> But when the sickness of bishop Thor-lac began to grow greatly upon him, he sent to fetch Thor-wald the son of Gizor Hall&apos;s son, who had both understanding and knowledge in great store, and was ever deemed well fitted to have the direction or decision of all matters of weight. And when he was come, the bishop gave him a careful account of the whole state of the lands and properties of the see, both how it had stood when he came to it, and what was the state it had now reached when he believed that he could manage it no longer. He also counted over to him particularly <pb id=pb494a n=494>those outlays which he had spent upon his kinsmen since he came to the management of the estate, and how he had brought them into a thriving state, no matter how much they had lacked. But when they saw that the estates had become much easier to manage and much wealthier in revenue, and that there had been great lack of money in them that were near-of-kin to him, then, by the counsel of Thor-wald and his other friends, he endowed his kinsmen yet again with certain outlays.

<p n=12.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> He declared that he wished to give his raiment to the clergy, and the richest he gave to the bishop that should come after him, but he would not give any indication as to whom he should be. His other raiment he gave to priests and other clerks, and the worst to the poor, for he would never leave them out when he was sharing gifts among his friends: and it was a joy to him then that he had given many hundreds [of money or cloth] and many ship-pounds <hi>or</hi> weights of meat to them every season.

<p>To bishop Brand of Holar he gave a finger-ring, but the ring he himself had borne daily on his hand he gave to Paul his sister&apos;s son, that was bishop next after him, and it was his consecrated ring, and many took it as a sign <hi>or</hi> token of the honour that afterwards came upon him. And this blessing was forthwith manifest, which is now not wondered at, so that every man deemed he got some good that got some remembrance that had once belonged to him.

<p n=12.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac went over particularly all private business with Thor-wald before they parted, which he thought most necessary for him to know; some he kept secret, others to be disclosed after his death.

<pb id=pb495a n=495><p n=12.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Seven nights before he died, the bishop called together the clergy and had himself anointed; and before he got the unction he made a very long speech, though speech was slow and hard to him. &lsquo;When I lay abed before,&rsquo; said he, &lsquo;with little strength and received unction in that sickness also, and when the chaunt [of the service for the dying] was to be performed as it is now, then I declared beforehand that all those men that were under grave charges before me should be free of his sentence if I were to be taken away. And this I meant as an act of mercy, but not as a condemnation of what I myself had done. But the reward I got therefore was that those, who would not treat my intent fairly, said that they could see that I had felt in my mind that I had gone farther in my sentences than I should, and that I was wishing to mitigate them altogether after my life was gone. But now I will give a proof [and show] whether these things have been true. Ye shall now hearken to and declare my sentence&mdash;that I will that all my sentences stand and the declarations of excommunication, unless they [that are under them] be reconciled to those men whom I have appointed to loose my laws, and I hold forth no absolution other than that which I have laid down before, and if not they must wait for the bishop that is to come after me.&rsquo;

<p n=12.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> And when he had said this, then he rested first, and afterwards he spoke to them that stood by: &lsquo;I wish to pray you,&rsquo; said he, &lsquo;that ye forgive me whatsoever I have done that ye have not thought right.&rsquo; All they that were by answered that they knew of no such thing, but yet that they would willingly grant him what he had asked of them. Then Gizor Hall&apos;s son spake on behalf of all, for he was the best fitted <pb id=pb496a n=496>in every way: &lsquo;We pray you, my lord, to forgive us that which we have misspoken or misdone towards you, and we are afraid that it is both much and great.&rsquo; And the blessed bishop Thor-lac consented cheerfully thereto. Then Gizor made a second speech, and it is now manifest that the Holy Ghost was speaking through him: &lsquo;We pray you this, my lord, although ye seem now to be parting with us as far as the bodily presence, that ye be a ghostly father to us and an intercessor for mercy with Almighty God, for we believe this, that ye will have no less power in the spiritual life with God than ye have now.&rsquo; But he was silent and answered nothing, and it is manifest why he did so, because now he granteth all that which he was then asked to do, but he would not then make it apparent, by reason of his lowliness, that he could think that he would be able to do this. And in this he behaved after the ensample of the Son of God, when he gave assent by holding his peace to certain things that were true, as the saints say [in the Gospels]. But when they had spoken thus, they that stood by were so overcome that there were few but could refrain from weeping.

<p n=12.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> But when the lord bishop saw that, he spake, &lsquo;Do not take it sore, though our lives must part. I have been a man of small account in every way, and little able to do aught if other men had not upheld me, wherefore ye have small loss in me, and I am going as it is appointed to me, but he shall come after me that shall be a man of great account. Moreover I will give you this comfort, that I am in [good] hope that God <pb id=pb497a n=497>will not condemn me as one of the damned.&rsquo; Then he kissed all his clerks and the rest of them that were in his household, and gave them all his blessing. After this he received the last unction, and after that he would say nought but what he deemed most needful, but ever as long as he could his lips moved in prayer as long as he was alive.

<p n=12.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> When seven nights were passed from the time when the blessed bishop Thor-lac was anointed, he asked early in the day that his clothes might be changed. Then Orm Eyj-olf&apos;s son the priest, his chaplain, went to him and said, &lsquo;We think it dangerous to move you, my lord, so weak as ye be, and will ye not keep your clothes in case ye have no long life?&rsquo; The bishop answered: &lsquo;It will do no harm to move me, and as to the unction I put my trust in God&apos;s mercy and not in these clothes.&rsquo; Then other clothes were given him, and there came no harm, as he had told them [there would not]. That day men did not see that he had lost so much strength as [he] was afterwards shown [to have done], because he kept up all those same goodly ways as he had maintained before, though his strength was small, yet his heart was as steadfast as before. But when the day wore on somewhat toward evening, then it began to go more hardly with him; and when evensong was finished, then they thought that he was fallen into a kind of swoon, but when he opened his eyes he said, &lsquo;Whither didst thou go then, Thor-kel?&rsquo; And Gizor Hall&apos;s son took <pb id=pb498a n=498>it that Thor-kel had appeared unto the bishop at his death, because he had been the man that had most certainly snatched him from jeopardy [of a worldly life].

<p n=12.10><ab type=parNum>10.</ab> And when bishop Thor-lac was come to his death, he asked them to give him to drink, and when he wished to turn to take it, he sunk back on his pillow and fell asleep sweetly with God; and God gave him this glory, that he should thirst at his death as God&apos;s own son had done, and the thirst of neither of them was slaked save in that everlasting life which the sons of God are ever thirsting after. God let this be made manifest in the death of the blessed bishop Thor-lac, that He should fulfil what He spake by the mouth of David [Ps. vulg. cxv. 15], &lsquo;Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of His saints.&rsquo; And albeit it was at that time hidden from men that the state of the bishop was such as it is now known to be, yet men did not deem it so to be with him as it was with other dead men, but rather most men deemed it better to be with his dead body than it was to be with other men alive.



<p n=13.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> Those things took place after the death of bishop Thor-lac that seemed of great import to them that were present and saw them, but they told them to few men at first, because they hoped that God would manifest more clearly what then was shown to them. This was one thing, that his colour was much brighter and more pleasant than that of other dead men. Another was, that the pupils of his eyes were bright a long time after his death as in a living man that can see. The <pb id=pb499a n=499>third thing was, that there were many sores on his skin both small and great, but they were all healed when they were looked for, and they that saw it thought it even then of great import, but now no man wondereth that it was so. There was a cloth laid over his face, but when Gizor came he said, &lsquo;Let us see our father!&rsquo; And the cloth was then taken away. And when he looked at his face, he deemed it of more account the pleasure that it gave him to behold it, inasmuch as he was a man that knew best the meaning thereof. After this the corpse of bishop Thor-lac was laid out carefully and his hair cut, and men got great advantage from this relic.

<p n=13.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He died the fifth day of the week [Thursday, Dec. 23], rather late in the day, one night before the preparation for Yule. He was then sixty years of age, and had been bishop fifteen winters. There were then passed from the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ mclxxx and vi winters [a thousand and a hundred and ninety and three years according to the reckoning of Dionysius] [1193].



<p n=14.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> On the morrow after, the corpse of bishop Thor-lac was carried to church and set up in the choir two nights to await the burial, and the second day of Yule it was laid in the earth. There were present Paul the deacon, his kinsman, who was bishop after him, and all the clergy that were in the neighbourhood. There came thither also at the same time the body of a poor man whom the bishop had taken out of beggary and maintained till his death-day; he had been a leper, and <pb id=pb500a n=500>God wished thereby to set forth this act of charity of his, which was one out of many that he did for God&apos;s sake in his life.

<p n=14.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But before men went away from the burying of the blessed bishop Thor-lac, Gizor Hall&apos;s son spake a long and fair speech upon what had taken place there according as the manner is over the grave <hi>or</hi> at the burying of men of rank. And I will set down certain of the words which he spake, which have gone least out of my mind. He set forth to them first what a profitable man he had been both to the see and to people in the country. After that he spake thus:&mdash;

<p n=14.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> &lsquo;I have been here present several times when such things took place as have taken place here to-day. Five bishops have been laid down here while I was standing by. First bishop Thor-lac Run-olfsson, then bishop Cetil, and then bishop Magnus, after that bishop Clong, but now bishop Thor-lac. I have also been used to speak some words when these things took place, as the custom is in other lands at the burying of men of rank: and the matter of discourse hath always been exceeding good, because they have all been the greatest men of mark in their bishopdoms. And it is good to remember this, that in our own judgment and in the report of our forbears respecting those bishops that have been here before our days and in our own days, that bishop was always judged the best by those whom he was best known to. And glorious men as they have all been, this is nevertheless peculiar to Thor-lac, that he prepared himself for the office of bishop far more <pb id=pb501a n=501>carefully than all the rest. He kept himself in chastity all his life, and he manifestly led a spotless life all his days with lowliness and all kind of holiness. He was hallowed at once, when he was yet a child, to the lower orders, one after another, until he was <hi>made</hi> priest as soon as might be by reason of his age. And when he was priest, then he gave himself to Almighty God under a regular life, and then he was hallowed canon, and after that prior, and lastly abbot. Whereby may be seen how he was looked on by his superiors and the wisest men that were best able to judge beforehand <hi>of men</hi>, in that they hallowed him to all the orders that he could take, for he kept so well every degree of his orders, that there was nought to be thought of but to go on giving him each new degree as long as there was any left.

<p>&lsquo;But nevertheless we are witnesses that, by God&apos;s mercy, his rank hath now at this last been most advanced, inasmuch as he hath been called from us into everlasting bliss and glory with God. And we who know so well many of his good ways can hardly conform to what is commanded, namely, to give express judgment upon no man&apos;s life. Still we have so much confidence in his worth that I think few men have reason for hope, if he be not now in full bliss, inasmuch as we know that he hath been most unlike all other men in the goodliness of his life.&rsquo;

<p>Many other wise words Gizor spake in his speech, but none that have better shown his foresight and good judgment than these which have just been told, and which have been proven true by experience.


<pb id=pb502a n=502><p n=15.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> Many things happened during those fifteen winters when Thor-lac was bishop in Scal-holt, with regard to the deaths of mighty men. There died then earl Erling [1179] and king Magnus [1184] his son, king Waldimar [1182], Henry king of the English [1189], earl Eiric [1190], archbishop Eystan [1188]. There was also a battle at Ila-fields [1180]...

<p n=15.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> These died of Icelanders&mdash;Beorn, abbot of Thwart-water; Cari, abbot [of Thing-ore, 1187]; Og-mund, abbot [of Holy-fell, drowned 1188]; Hall, abbot [of Thwart-water, 1190]; and many other clerks and men of worth both here in the country and in other places<note n=1 id=n502.1><hi>Stockholm MS. reads:</hi>&mdash;The people of the see and men of this country far and wide felt the death of the blessed bishop Thor-lac grievously, inasmuch as they believed him to have been parted further from men than it hath now proven: because there had never before arisen a saint nor miracles of any man <hi>been shown forth</hi> in Iceland before bishop Thor-lac&apos;s. Nevertheless, many men were comforted by cheering dreams until God made manifest his miracles. Howbeit there was a hard season and distress, only one bishop in the land, and he a very old man, and war abrewing in the north of the country.</note>.


</div2>

<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=s3.3.3 lang=is rend="align-with(en.pols)">
<head>PÓLS SAGA.</head>

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a502.17><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Þóll vas son Ioans, ens g&aolig;fgazta mannz, Loftz sonar, <anchor id=a502.18>Sæmundar sonar ens Fróða. Móðer Ioans vas Þóra, <anchor id=a502.19>dótter Magnús konungs Berf&oeacute;ttz; en móðer Póls vas Ragneiðr, <anchor id=a503.1><pb id=pb503 n=503><note place=margin>[127: 1.]</note>Þórhallz dótter, syster Þorláks byscops ens helga. Póll vas f&oeacute;ddr <anchor id=a503.2>upp í Odda með Ioane f&aolig;ðor sínom; ok lagðe hann sialfr, ok svá <anchor id=a503.3>aðrer, því meire virðing á hann sem hann vas ellre.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a503.4><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Póll vas vænn at álite, fagr-eygr ok fast-eygr; hrockin-hárr <anchor id=a503.5>ok fagr-hárr; limaðr vel ok lítt f&oeacute;ttr<note place=apparatus id=an503.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f&oeacute;ttr]</ab> 384; feitr, Cd.</note>; lit-biartr ok h&aolig;rund-lióss,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a503.6>meðal-maðr at vexte, ok manna curteisaztr. Hann vas næmr, ok <anchor id=a503.7>vel lærðr þegar á unga aldre; ok hagr at hví-vetna því es hann <anchor id=a503.8>g&oelig;rðe, bæðe at rite ok at &aolig;ðro.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a503.9><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hann kvángaðesc ungr, ok feck Herdísar Ketils dóttor, <anchor id=a503.10>vænnar kono ok vel at ser at hví-vetna því, es kvenn-mann mátte<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a503.11>prýða.

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a503.12><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En es þau h&aolig;fðo f&aoacute; vetr saman veret, þá fór Póll útan, ok <anchor id=a503.13>vas á hende Haralde iarle í Orkneyjom; ok lagðe hann mikla <anchor id=a503.14>virðing á hann. En hann fór suðr til Englannz, ok vas þar í <anchor id=a503.15>scóla; ok nam þar svá miket nám, at trautt vóro d&oeacute;me til, at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a503.16>nockorr maðr hefðe iam-miket nám numet né því líkt á iam-langre <anchor id=a503.17>stund. Ok þá es hann kom út til Íslannz, þá vas hann fyrer &aolig;llom <anchor id=a503.18>&aolig;ðrom m&aolig;nnom at curteise, ok lærdóm sínom<note place=apparatus id=an503.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> Emend.; kurteise lærdoms síns, Cd.</note>, versa-g&oelig;rð ok <anchor id=a503.19>bóca-list<note place=apparatus id=an503.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-list]</ab> emend.; bóka lestri, Cd.</note>. Hann vas ok svá mikell radd-maðr ok s&oelig;ng-maðr, at af <anchor id=a503.20>bar s&oelig;ngr hans ok r&aolig;dd af &aolig;ðrom m&aolig;nnom þeim es þá vóro<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a503.21>hónom sam-tíða.

<p n=1.5><anchor id=a503.22><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Hann fór þá enn til vistar í Odda, ok hafðe þá enn gótt yfer&shy;læte <anchor id=a503.23>sem vert vas. En lítlo síðarr g&oelig;rðe Póll bú í Skarðe; ok <anchor id=a504.1><pb id=pb504 n=504><note place=margin>[128: 1.]</note>vas margs til fyrst fátt þess es hafa þurfte; en svá kom sk&aolig;rung&shy;skapr <anchor id=a504.2>þeirra beggja hióna, ok góð-vild vina, í hald, at þau &aoacute;tto <anchor id=a504.3>&oeacute;ret hvet-vetna<note place=apparatus id=an504.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> hver-vetna, Cd.</note> skams bragðs; ok urðo þau þó<note place=apparatus id=an504.2><ab type=textRef>þó]</ab> þá, Cd.</note> fyrer enom <anchor id=a504.4>st&oeacute;rstom fiár-sk&aolig;ðom; ok b&aoacute;ro þau hann vel ok prúðlega; enda <anchor id=a504.5>vas svá sem ecki g&oelig;rðe af því, ok þá<note place=apparatus id=an504.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <hi>Read</hi> þó.</note> óxo fé þeirra sem sær genge<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a504.6>á land.

<p n=1.6><anchor id=a504.7><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Póll vas raun-góðr ok fá-lyndr; ok þýðr við alla vine sína <anchor id=a504.8>ok alla góða menn; en hann vas stirð-lyndr við vánda menn, <anchor id=a504.9>þiófa ok íll-menne. Stiórnar-maðr mikell vas hann um alla hlute í <anchor id=a504.10>sinne sveit, ok &oelig;rr til-fara allz-staðar þar es þurfa þótte hans<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a504.11>til-kv&aoacute;mo.

<p n=1.7><anchor id=a504.12><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Póll vas goðorz-maðr, ok hélt hann svá alla sína þing-menn <anchor id=a504.13>til allra réttra mála at hverge varð þeirra hlutr under.

<p n=1.8><anchor id=a504.14><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Póll átte fiogor b&aolig;rn, þau es or barn&oelig;sko kómosc, við <anchor id=a504.15>Herdíse kono sínne, sono tvá ok d&oeacute;tr tvær. Syner hans héto<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a504.16>Loftr, ok Ketill; en d&oeacute;tr héto Halla, ok Þóra: þau vóro &aolig;ll væn <anchor id=a504.17>at álite, ok vel at ser þegar (es) þau óxo upp.

<p n=1.9><anchor id=a504.18><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Þorlákr byscop, móðor-bróðer Póls, lagðe á hann mikla <anchor id=a504.19>virðing, ok unne hónom miket, ok bauð hónom oft til sín. En þó <anchor id=a504.20>nockorer h&aolig;fðingjar aðrer være and-streymer Þorláke byscope,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a504.21>þá vas Póll hónom því traustare frænde ok full-trúe, sem aðrer <anchor id=a504.22>gengo meirr undan. En þá <hi>es</hi> Þorlákr byscop andaðesc, þá sýnde<note place=apparatus id=an504.4><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá sýnde]</ab> thus?</note> <anchor id=a504.23>Póll enn sína ástlegre frændseme an flester aller hans g&aolig;fger <anchor id=a504.24>viner.

<pb id=pb505 n=505><note place=margin>[128: 2.]</note>

<p n=2.1><anchor id=a505.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Et næsta sumar efter andlát Þorláks byscops ens Helga <anchor id=a505.2>vas Póll k&oelig;renn til byscops: áðr vas miok l&aolig;ng til-r&oeacute;ða <anchor id=a505.3>um þat mál: en þar kom um síðer, at þat vas laget under <anchor id=a505.4>Brand byscop, mest at ráðe Hallz Giz&oelig;rar sonar; en hann kaus <anchor id=a505.5>Pól til útan-ferðar. En hann iátte eige brátt under at ganga, ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a505.6>geck annarr til at &aolig;ðrom at biðja hann, Brandr byscop ok svá <anchor id=a505.7>br&oeacute;ðr hans, ok aðrer hans ást-viner; en hann synjaðe, ok fór við <anchor id=a505.8>þat heim af þinge.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a505.9><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Síðan fór hann í Odda til kirkjo-dags um Seljo-manna-messo <anchor id=a505.10>með mikelle á-hyggjo. En es aller vóro á þrotner at biðja hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a505.11>til, ok hann sá, at þá vas við &oelig;nga at bægjasc, nema í mót Goðs <anchor id=a505.12>vilja være&mdash;ok vilde hann þat víst eige þá es hann í-hugaðe sítt <anchor id=a505.13>ráð&mdash;þá skaut enn Helge Ande hónom því í hog, at leggja sialfan <anchor id=a505.14>sik í ábyrgð til þyrftar m&aolig;nnom; ok geck hann þá síðan r&aolig;sklega <anchor id=a505.15>under þann vanda, es hónom hafðe áðr lenge hogr við boðet.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a505.16><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En lítlo síðarr fór hann í Scála-holt, ok Ioan faðer hans með <anchor id=a505.17>hónom ok br&oeacute;ðr hans, ok tók þegar við &aolig;llom fiár-forr&aoacute;ðom <anchor id=a505.18>staðarens. Hann bauð þá þegar þar at vesa Giz&oelig;re Hallz syne, <anchor id=a505.19>es áðr hafðe þar veret um daga Þorláks byscops ens Helga, ok <anchor id=a505.20>mest staðar-prýðe vas at ok híbýla bót, þeirra manna es þar<note place=apparatus id=an505.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es þar]</ab> conj.; om. Cd.</note> være.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a505.21>Póll lét &aolig;ll en s&aolig;mo fiár-forr&aoacute;ð vesa í Scála-holte, sem áðr h&aolig;fðo <anchor id=a505.22>veret; en hann sette Þorkel prest Hallz son til kirkjo-varð-veizlo; <anchor id=a506.1><pb id=pb506 n=506><note place=margin>[129: 3.]</note>ok sá<note place=apparatus id=an506.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sá]</ab> þá, Cd.</note> þiónaðe hónom fyrst, es hann kom út; en hann vas síðan <anchor id=a506.2>canoce í Vere.

<p n=2.4><anchor id=a506.3><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Herdís varð-veitte bú þeirra í Skarðe, ok b&aolig;rn þeirra &aolig;ll, ok <anchor id=a506.4>&aolig;ll auðr&oeacute;ðe þeirra vel ok s&oeacute;milega, meðan hann vas útan; ok vas <anchor id=a506.5>þat al-mælt, at einge b&aolig;rn være svá vel vanið<note place=apparatus id=an506.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> vanin, Cd.</note> sem þeirra b&aolig;rn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a506.6>í &aolig;llo heraðe; ok hélt þat vel skape meðan hon lifðe; af þvi <hi>at</hi> <anchor id=a506.7>hon vas allra kvenna v&aolig;ndozt, bæðe fyre sína h&aolig;nd ok annarra <anchor id=a506.8>manna, sem oft bar raun á.

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a506.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Póll fór útan et sama sumar, sem hann vas til byscops <anchor id=a506.10>k&oelig;renn<note place=apparatus id=an506.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> kosenn, Cd.</note>, ok vas þá diacn at vígslom. Hónom greidd&shy;esc<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a506.11>sín ferð vel unz hann kom til Noregs; ok fór síðan til Kaupangs <anchor id=a506.12>í Níðar-óse, ok vas þar um vetrenn unz leið Iól ...<note place=apparatus id=an506.4><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> here something is missing.</note> ok þóttesc <anchor id=a506.13>hverr þeirra manna bazt hafa, es hans s&oeacute;mð ok virðing g&oelig;rðe <anchor id=a506.14>mesta, því heldr es g&aolig;fgare vóro; ok virðo þeir þá rétt.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a506.15><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Eirekr erki-byscop vas í Danm&aolig;rko þá es Póll kom útan til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a506.16>vígslo, ok vas hann með Absalone erki-byscope; en Sverrer Magnus <anchor id=a506.17>konungr vas austr í Vík, ok fór þaðan á Uppl&aolig;nd. En efter <anchor id=a506.18>Iól for Póll norðan or Kaupange á fund konungs með síno f&aolig;ro-neyte, <anchor id=a506.19>ok (vas) þá með hónom fiolðe konungs manna. En konungr <anchor id=a506.20>tók svá vel við hónom, sem sonr hans eðr bróðer være til handa<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a506.21>hónom komenn; ok g&oelig;rðe svá mikla tign hans ok virðing, sem <anchor id=a506.22>hann m&oelig;nde sialfr kiósa eða hans viner: en bæðe vas, at hann <anchor id=a507.1><pb id=pb507 n=507><note place=margin>[129: 4.]</note>kunne betr an flester menn aðrer, ok hafðe betre f&oeacute;re á; ok sló <anchor id=a507.2>&aolig;llo við því es til g&oeacute;ða vas, es þeir mætte báðer g&aolig;fgazter af <anchor id=a507.3>verða.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a507.4><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þórer byscop vígðe Pól til prestz í Hamar-kaupange. Þat <anchor id=a507.5>vas á Imbro-d&aolig;gom á Langa-f&aolig;sto, einne nótt efter Mathias-messo;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a507.6>ok fór hann síðan aftr til konungs ena s&aolig;mo nótt; ok vas <anchor id=a507.7>þá með hónom, unz hann fór til Danmerkr; ok feck konungr <anchor id=a507.8>hónom alla hlute þá es hann þóttesc hafa þ&aolig;rf á or lande. Konungr <anchor id=a507.9>lét ok alla byscopa fá hónom bréf sín með insiglom þá es í lande <anchor id=a507.10>vóro. Fór hann síðan til Danmerkr um F&aolig;stona, ok kom til<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a507.11>Lundar Pásca-dagenn fyrsta, á fund erki-byscopa; ok bauð Absalon <anchor id=a507.12>hónom þegar til sín, es hann kom, með enne mesto s&oeacute;mð, en beið <anchor id=a507.13>hans at há-messo, es<note place=apparatus id=an507.1><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es]</ab> þegar, Cd.</note> hann visse at hans vas þangat v&aoacute;n.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a507.14><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Vas hann síðan með erki-byscopom<note place=apparatus id=an507.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-byscopom]</ab> emend.; -byscope, Cd.</note> um Pásca-vicona ok vas <anchor id=a507.15>í eno tígolegzto yferlæte af þeim b&aoacute;ðom; ok vas þá þegar ráðen<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a507.16>vígsla hans; af því þeir g&aoacute;to brátt reynt þat hverr sk&aolig;rungr hann <anchor id=a507.17>vas, bæðe at lærdóme ok vitrleik ok at-g&oelig;rve. En hann beið <anchor id=a507.18>vígslo í munk-lífe því es heiter at Heraðs-vaðe; ok vas hann fyrr <anchor id=a507.19>vígðr an þeir h&aolig;fðo þó ætlat es þeir skilðosc; ok kom þat mest til <anchor id=a507.20>þess, at Knútr konungr Valdemars son lagðe þau orð til, at hans<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a507.21>ferð skylde flýta efter því sem hónom gegnde bazt, ok þeim <anchor id=a507.22>m&aolig;nnom es hann skylde byscop yfer vesa; ok fór þat efter an&shy;narre <anchor id=a508.1><pb id=pb508 n=508><note place=margin>[130: 5.]</note>hans gæfo, at enn g&aolig;fgazte maðr virðe hann þar svá mikels <anchor id=a508.2>ó-sénan<note place=apparatus id=an508.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> ósen, Cd.</note>, at hann gaf þat ráð til sem hann munde sialfr kiósa.

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a508.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Absalon erki-byscop vígðe Pól til byscops Ioans-dag byscops, <anchor id=a508.4>viij nóttom fyre Philippus messo ok Iacobus, at ráðe Eireks erki-byscops, <anchor id=a508.5>es eige hafðe þá sialfr sýn til at vígja hann: vóro byscopar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a508.6>við vígslo Póls byscops, Eirekr erki-byscop ok Pétr byscop af Róes-keldo. <anchor id=a508.7>Póll byscop gaf goll-hring Absalone erki-byscope, en annan <anchor id=a508.8>Eireke erki-byscope, ok &aolig;llom &aolig;ðrom nockorar g&oelig;rsemar þeim <anchor id=a508.9>es studdo embætte hans vígslo ok tign. Celestinus vas þá Páve es <anchor id=a508.10>Póll byscop vas vígðr: Póll byscop vas þá fer-t&oelig;gr at aldre es hann<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a508.11>vas til byscops vígðr.

<p n=3.6><anchor id=a508.12><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Fór hann síðan til Noregs, ok fann Sverre konung í Vík <anchor id=a508.13>austr, ok fór með hónom til Biorgynjar<note place=apparatus id=an508.2><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> Biorgvinar, Cd.</note>; ok vas með hónom unz <anchor id=a508.14>hann fór til Íslannz et sama sumar; ok tignaðe (konungr) hann <anchor id=a508.15>því meirr í &aolig;llom hlutom, sem hann hafðe lengr með hónom veret,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a508.16>ok hann kunne hann g&oelig;rr. Aller virðo hann mikels, sem v&aoacute;n vas <anchor id=a508.17>at, ok hans frændr vóro aller þeir es g&aolig;fgazter vóro í landeno.

<p n=4.1><anchor id=a508.18><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Póll byscop fór þá út til Íslannz et sama sumar sem <anchor id=a508.19>hann hafðe vígðr veret til byscops, ok kom í Eyja-fi&aolig;rð; <anchor id=a508.20>ok veitte hann þá þegar dýrlega veizlo Brande byscope ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a508.21>&aolig;ðrom sínom vinom, þeim es þar vas við kostr, vín at drecka, ok <anchor id=a508.22>&aolig;ll &aolig;nnor þau at-f&aolig;ng sem mest m&aoacute;tto verða. Sýndesc þat þá <anchor id=a509.1><pb id=pb509 n=509><note place=margin>[131: 5.]</note>þegar í fyrsto, sem oft urðo síðan rauner at, at hann unðe þá ofallt <anchor id=a509.2>bazt, es hann gladde sína vine sem flesta ok vanda-menn, í veizlom <anchor id=a509.3>virðolegom með ástúð ok sk&aolig;rungskap.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a509.4><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann hafðe þá út með ser tvá gler-glugga at f&oeacute;ra kirkjonne <anchor id=a509.5>í Scála-holte, festar-meyjo sínne andlegre; ok sýnde hann þá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a509.6>þegar, þat es síðarr kom enn meirr framm, hvat hónom bió í hog, <anchor id=a509.7>hverso miok hann vilde þá kirkjo prýða, um þat framm sem áðr <anchor id=a509.8>vas, es hann vas til vígðr, þótt hon være áðr g&oelig;rvelegre ok dýrlegre <anchor id=a509.9>an hver annarra es á Íslande vóro.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a509.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Sú vas en fyrsta virðing es Póll byscop g&oelig;rðe til síns stóls ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a509.11>sínnar kirkjo, um þat framm sem ne einn byscop hafðe g&oelig;rt áðr, <anchor id=a509.12>at hann s&oelig;ng &oelig;nga messo áðr hann kom til stóls í Scála-holt: en <anchor id=a509.13>í &aolig;llom l&aolig;ndom es sú virðing á, at eige sé minna vert at hlýða <anchor id=a509.14>prestz messo ný-vígðz<note place=apparatus id=an509.1><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-vígðz]</ab> emend.; vígðre, Cd.</note> enne fyrsto, heldr an byscops messo ein&shy;hverre; <anchor id=a509.15>en þetta mátte því meira, sem þá vas bæðe senn at hlýða<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a509.16>prestz messo ok byscops: ok dreif þá síðan fiolðe manna í Scála-holt <anchor id=a509.17>til þeirra fagnaðar tíðenda, at hlýða messo Póls byscops enne <anchor id=a509.18>fyrsto. Þar vóro þá marger g&aolig;fger menn við stadder, Ióan Loftz <anchor id=a509.19>son faðer hans, Sæmundr ok Ormr br&oeacute;ðr hans, ok Giz&oelig;rr Hallz <anchor id=a509.20>son, ok vas þar þá miket fiolmenne. Byscop mælte þá langt mál<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a509.21>ok fagrt; ok hét þá þegar því sem flester urðo fegnazter, at hann <anchor id=a509.22>m&oelig;nde &aolig;ll boð þau bióða, sem Þorlákr byscop hafðe boðet.

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a509.23><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þat mátte ok þá þegar brátt siá, es hann tók yfer-f&aolig;r um sýslo <anchor id=a509.24>sína, hverso blíðr ok þeckr hann vas við alla sína under-menn, ok <anchor id=a510.1><pb id=pb510 n=510><note place=margin>[131: 6.]</note>hverso ó-vant hann lét g&oelig;ra við sik &aolig;llom, es hónom skyldo beina <anchor id=a510.2>vinna eðr aðra hlute þá es skylt vas hann at tigna. Varð hann <anchor id=a510.3>við þat svá ást-sæll við alla alþýðo at aller unno hónom hog-&aoacute;stom <anchor id=a510.4>nálega um allt land, bæðe í sínne sýslo, ok svá í annarre sýslo eige <anchor id=a510.5>at síðr.&mdash;Þat vas ok auð-sýnt hvé mikell fé-maðr hann m&oelig;nde<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a510.6>verða fyrer sakar um, siá ok sk&aolig;rungskapar ofallt í sí-fello.

<p n=4.5><anchor id=a510.7><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Póll byscop hafðe einn vetr seteð í Scála-holte áðr Herdís, <anchor id=a510.8>kona hans, kom þangat til um<hi>b</hi>-sýslo fyr innan stock; ok vas <anchor id=a510.9>svá mikel stoð ok styrkr at, bæðe staðnom ok hónom<note place=apparatus id=an510.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> ok var honom, Cd.</note> si&aolig;lfom, sem <anchor id=a510.10>enge vas &aolig;nnor slík af m&aolig;nnom meðan hann vas at stóle. Svá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a510.11>vas sk&aolig;rungskapr hennar mikell ok um<hi>b</hi>-sýsla, at hon hafðe f&aoacute; <anchor id=a510.12>vetr þar veret áðr þar vas hvet-vetna &oeacute;ret þat<note place=apparatus id=an510.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> &oelig;ret nóg, Cd.</note> es hafa þurfte, ok <anchor id=a510.13>einskis þurfte í bú at biðja, þótt hundrað manna være á búe, en <anchor id=a510.14>siau tiger eða átta tiger heima-manna.

<p n=5.1><anchor id=a510.15><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Póll byscop sá þat brátt es hann kom til stóls í Scála-holte,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a510.16>at hónom þótte þat skylt, at styðja ok styrkja, <anchor id=a510.17>ok til loka f&oeacute;ra, þat es enn heilage Þorlákr byscop hafðe sínn vilja <anchor id=a510.18>sýndan, ok hann lét kaupa til: en þat vas at búa um cloccor þær <anchor id=a510.19>es hann hafðe keypt til staðarens í Scála-holte, es þá vóro baztar <anchor id=a510.20>á &aolig;llo Íslande. Hann hafðe ok<note place=apparatus id=an510.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> ok hann, Cd.</note> fiogor tré haft út með clocconom,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a510.21>tví-t&oelig;g at hæð alnom at mæla.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a510.22><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Póll byscop feck til síðan þann mann es hagaztr vas á &aolig;llo <anchor id=a511.1><pb id=pb511 n=511><note place=margin>[132: 6.]</note>Íslande á tré, es Ámunde Árna son hét, at g&oelig;ra st&aolig;pol svá miok <anchor id=a511.2>vandaðan at efnom ok smíð<note place=apparatus id=an511.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> smíði, Cd.</note>, at hann bar eige miðr af &aolig;llom tré-smíðom <anchor id=a511.3>á Íslande, en áðr kirkjan si&aolig;lf. Hann lét g&oelig;ra kirkjo <anchor id=a511.4>uppe í st&aolig;plenom, ok rið upp at ganga; ok vígðe hann þá kirkjo <anchor id=a511.5>enom heilaga Þorláke byscope enn tíunda dag í Iólom, ok bió þá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a511.6>kirkjo at &aolig;llo fagrlega, ok feck þar hvet-vetna<note place=apparatus id=an511.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hvet-v.]</ab> Cd.</note> til þat es hafa þurfte. <anchor id=a511.7>Hann lét Atla prest, skrifara, penta allt ræfr innan í st&aolig;plenom, ok <anchor id=a511.8>svá biórenn; ok tialda allt et neðra þrennom ti&aolig;ldom, vel ok fagrlega; <anchor id=a511.9>ok svá lét hann skrifa yfer ser hvers leiðe þeirra niðr-setning, <anchor id=a511.10>hvers þeirra es þar hvíla í st&aolig;plenom. Hann lagðe eige minna fé<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a511.11>til st&aolig;pol-smíðar, at því es hónom hugðesc si&aolig;lfom at, an fiogor <anchor id=a511.12>c hundraða, eða þaðan af meira. Hann keypte cloccor þær í <anchor id=a511.13>st&aolig;polenn, es enar mesto g&oelig;rsemar vóro iam-miklar, at þeim <anchor id=a511.14>manne Nor&aeacute;nom es Kolr hét. Hann keypte enn fleire cloccor <anchor id=a511.15>til st&aolig;polsens, ok svá sam-hringjor tvær uppe í kirkjonne; ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a511.16>prýdde hána í hví-vetna því<note place=apparatus id=an511.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>því]</ab> þat, Cd.</note> es hogom mátte hyggja, bæðe kirkjo <anchor id=a511.17>ok stopol, í búninge &aolig;llom, í brícom<note place=apparatus id=an511.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>brícom]</ab> 384; kirkionne, Cd.</note> ok í crossom, í scriptom, <anchor id=a511.18>licneskjom ok l&aolig;mpom, ok gler-gluggom, ok í byscops skrúðe allz <anchor id=a511.19>kyns. Hann lét ok stein-þró h&oelig;ggva ágæta haglega, þá es hann <anchor id=a511.20>vas í lagðr efter andlát sítt; ok hann lét búa crypt<note place=apparatus id=an511.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>crypt]</ab> emend.; groft, Cd.</note> virðolega í<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a511.21>st&aolig;plenom, þeirra manna es hónom þótte mestr vande á.

<pb id=pb512 n=512><note place=margin>[132: 7.]</note>

<p n=6.1><anchor id=a512.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> Á eno þriðja áre byscopsdóms Póls byscops andaðesc <anchor id=a512.2>Ioan Loptz son, faðer hans, Allra-heilagra-dag, sá <anchor id=a512.3>maðr es þá vas g&aolig;fgaztr á &aolig;llo Íslande. Hann virðe ser þat miket <anchor id=a512.4>niðr-fall vesa, es þá vas þess mannz við misst, es mest mátte hans <anchor id=a512.5>virðing hefja ok styrkja, ok vas skyldastr til allra manna.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a512.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En Allz-valdande Goð, es hans gæfo lét ofallt vaxa dag frá <anchor id=a512.7>dege, en aldregi minka, g&oeacute;dde svá hans virðing, at enge maðr <anchor id=a512.8>hafðe áðr á Íslande orðet af sínom frændom iamn-g&aolig;fogr ok <anchor id=a512.9>tigenn sem hann varð þá af sínom ná-frænda, Þorláke enom helga <anchor id=a512.10>byscope; af þvi at þá birtesc dýrð hans ok heilagleikr, fyrst fyr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a512.11>norðan land, ok þar efter um allt Ísland, ok &aolig;ll l&aolig;nd &aolig;nor þau <anchor id=a512.12>es í n&aoacute;nd vóro. En þótt Póll byscop yrðe þessom tíðendom <anchor id=a512.13>fegnare an flester aðrer, þá fór hann svá varúðlega með því mále, <anchor id=a512.14>at hann hafðe allra h&aolig;fðingja ok ena vitrozto manna at-kvæðe <anchor id=a512.15>fyrer ser um meðferð þessa máls<note place=apparatus id=an512.1><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> Emend.; at hann h. allra h. ok hina u. menn f. ser mest um þetta atkvæde ok meðferð þessa máls, Cd.</note>; ok vas þat eige trútt, at<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a512.16>eige legðesc sá orð-rómr á af n&oelig;ckvorom m&aolig;nnom, at hann <anchor id=a512.17>vilde þetta mál lítt á loft f&oeacute;ra af heilagleik ens sæla Þorláks <anchor id=a512.18>byscops. En hónom kom þó þat til, at hann vilde svá launa <anchor id=a512.19>Goðe dýrð þá, es hann lét verða á hans d&aolig;gom, es áðr hafðe <anchor id=a512.20>aldregi slík orðet, ok<note place=apparatus id=an512.2><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok]</ab> om. Cd.</note> at hann vilde þá meðferð alla hafa, es v&aoacute;n vas<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a512.21>at Goðe m&oelig;nde bazt þyckja. Þótte hónom van<hi>d</hi>-f&oeacute;rt með vesa, <anchor id=a512.22>sem vas, at mundangs-miket være af teket í fyrsto, ok eige mætte <anchor id=a512.23>at s&aolig;nno at finna. En enge trúðe fyrr né fram-kvæmðe an hann <anchor id=a513.1><pb id=pb513 n=513><note place=margin>[133: 8.]</note>dýrð ok heilagleik ens sæla Þorláks byscops, þótt hann f&oeacute;re með <anchor id=a513.2>varúðlegar an aðrer. En þó vas þat allra manna ráð enna vitrozto, <anchor id=a513.3>með orðsendingo Brannz byscops, at helgr dómr Þorláks byscops <anchor id=a513.4>være upp tekenn or i&aolig;rðo et sama sumar, efter því sem hann hafðe <anchor id=a513.5>sialfr sagt fyrer í berre<note place=apparatus id=an513.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>berre]</ab> 384; þeirre, Cd.</note> vitran Þórvallz prestz á Iólom enom næstom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a513.6>áðr.

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a513.7><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Efter þing þat et sama sumar, es þetta vas ráðet, sende Póll <anchor id=a513.8>byscop orð Brande byscope, ok br&oeacute;ðrom sínom, Sæmunde ok <anchor id=a513.9>Orme; ok sonom Giz&oelig;rar Hallz sonar, Þórvalde ok Magnúse; <anchor id=a513.10>Þórleife Þorláks syne or Hitár-dale, móðor-f&aolig;ðor Herdísar; Katle<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a513.11>syne hans; Þorláke Ketils syne, bróðor Herdísar; Goðmunde <anchor id=a513.12>preste Ara syne, es síðan varð byscop at<note place=apparatus id=an513.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> á, Cd.</note> Hólom; ok m&aolig;rgom <anchor id=a513.13>&aolig;ðrom sínom ást-vinom. Póll byscop g&oelig;rðe dýrlega veizlo þeim <anchor id=a513.14>m&aolig;nnom es þar kómo; ok vas þar þá síðan tekenn upp or i&aolig;rðo <anchor id=a513.15>heilagr dómr ens sæla Þorláks byscops, ok búet þá um virðolega,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a513.16>sem sómðe, efter for-si&aoacute; ok fyrer-s&aolig;gn Póls byscops; ok fylgðo <anchor id=a513.17>iarteiner þá þegar þar stórar, sem sagt verðr í s&aolig;go hans; ok vas <anchor id=a513.18>þat dýrð hans, en gæfa Póls byscops.

<p n=6.4><anchor id=a513.19><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Et næsta sumar efter vas leiddr í l&aolig;g messo-dagr Þorláks <anchor id=a513.20>byscops um allt land; ok sett fasta fyrer, tveggja d&oeacute;gra. Efter<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a513.21>þat sótto marger menn þangat of allt land at dýrka enn sæla <anchor id=a513.22>Þorlák byscop í v&aolig;kom ok f&aolig;stom, í b&oeacute;na-halde ok fé-gi&aolig;fom, <anchor id=a513.23>ok svá sótto ok þeir menn þangat es í f&aolig;rom vóro á hverjom <anchor id=a514.1><pb id=pb514 n=514><note place=margin>[134: 8.]</note>misserom fiol-menner, bæðe út-lenzker menn ok Íslenzker; ok <anchor id=a514.2>f&oeacute;rðo heit sín þar, es þeir h&aolig;fðo heiteð, ok seldo í h&aolig;nd Póle <anchor id=a514.3>byscope, ok s&aolig;gðo hónom ser-hverja at-burðe sínna á-heita, ok <anchor id=a514.4>iarteina þeirra es þeir þ&aoacute;go á móte; ok vóro hónom þat ofallt <anchor id=a514.5>fegin-s&aolig;gor. Þeir b&aoacute;ro aller á braut sannar rauner heilagleiks ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a514.6>dýrðar ens sæla Þorláks byscops, en rausn ok stór-menzko Póls <anchor id=a514.7>byscops.

<p n=6.5><anchor id=a514.8><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> En þó áðr være mikel virðing Póls byscops sem verðogt vas, <anchor id=a514.9>áðr upp k&oeacute;me helge Þorláks byscops, þá g&oeacute;dde þat í miok metorð <anchor id=a514.10>hans, es hann átte sann-g&aolig;fgaztan móðor-bróðor; ok vætto<note place=apparatus id=an514.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vætto]</ab> vænto, Cd.</note> marger,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a514.11>at et forn-kveðna m&oelig;nde sannasc, at &lsquo;móðor-br&oeacute;ðrom verðe <anchor id=a514.12>menn líkazter,&rsquo; ok þótte þar líkende m&aolig;rg á g&oelig;rasc, at þar m&oelig;nde <anchor id=a514.13>ok svá vesa; af þvi <hi>at</hi> hann g&oelig;rðe marga hlute efter því sem enn <anchor id=a514.14>sæle Þorlákr byscop hafðe g&oelig;rt. Hann vas ráðvandr ok r&oeacute;kenn <anchor id=a514.15>at tíða-g&oelig;rð: hann vas meinlæta-samr í f&aolig;stom ok í klæða-búninge:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a514.16>hann hafðe ok á-kenning allra hluta þeirra, es hann <anchor id=a514.17>mátte varr við verða, at enn sæle Þorlákr byscop hafðe í sínom <anchor id=a514.18>h&aoacute;ttom; lítilæte, ok olmoso-g&oeacute;ðe; harðlífe, ok þolin-m&oeacute;ðe, sem <anchor id=a514.19>hvárr-tvegge þeirra varð í raun margre ok mikelle í sínom <anchor id=a514.20>byscops&shy;dóme.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=6.6><anchor id=a514.21><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þá es Póle byscope þótte nockot samnasc ok saman dragasc <anchor id=a514.22>fiár-hlutr sá, es menn g&aoacute;fo af góð-vilja enom sæla Þorláke byscope, <anchor id=a514.23>þá sýnde hann þat brátt hvat hónom bió í skape. Hann keypte <anchor id=a515.1><pb id=pb515 n=515><note place=margin>[135: 9.]</note>þá síðan við goll-smið þann es Þórsteinn hét, ok þá vas hagaztr <anchor id=a515.2>maðr at malme<note place=apparatus id=an515.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>malme]</ab> 384; malan, Cd.</note> á &aolig;llo Íslande. En svá urðo til-f&aolig;ng af hans <anchor id=a515.3>hende, at ecke skorte þat es hafa þurfte til þeirrar smíðar es hann <anchor id=a515.4>vilde smíða láta. Hann lét taka til scrín-g&oelig;rðar; ok lagðe<note place=apparatus id=an515.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lagðe]</ab> lagðesc, Cd.</note> þar <anchor id=a515.5>til &oelig;r-grynne<note place=apparatus id=an515.3><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> ogrynne, Cd.</note> fiár í golle ok gim-steinom ok í brendo silfre. Hann<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a515.6>lagðe þar ok eige minna fé til scríns<note place=apparatus id=an515.4><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> skrínis, Cd.</note> ok smíðar-kaups, með <anchor id=a515.7>till&aolig;gom annarra manna, an fiogor hundrað hundraða. Þat smíðe <anchor id=a515.8>vas miok svá vandat, (svá) at þat bar eige minna af &aolig;ðrom scrínom, <anchor id=a515.9>þeim es á Íslande vóro, um fegrð an um v&aolig;xt; ok vas þat betr an <anchor id=a515.10>þriggja alna; en ecki vas annat betr an alnar langt þeirra es þá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a515.11>vóro á Íslande. Enge man spyrja þess vitra manna es scrínet sér, <anchor id=a515.12>hvert stór-menne sá maðr hefer veret, es þá g&oelig;rseme hefer g&oelig;ra <anchor id=a515.13>láteð; eðr til hvers hann hefer ok f&oeacute;rr veret fyrer efna saker.

<p n=7.1><anchor id=a515.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Á dogom Póls byscops kom útan af Gr&oeacute;n<hi>a</hi>-lande <anchor id=a515.15>Ioan byscop, ok vas í Aust-fi&aolig;rðom um vetrenn; en<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a515.16>kom síðan á ofan-verðre Langa-f&aolig;sto í Scála-holt á fund Póls <anchor id=a515.17>byscops; ok kom þar at Scír-dege; ok vígðo þeir báðer mikenn <anchor id=a515.18>crisma<note place=apparatus id=an515.5><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mikenn crisma]</ab> 384; biscopar, Cd. (?).</note>; ok h&aolig;fðo þeir margar t&aolig;lor trúlegar, ok spaklegar r&oeacute;ðor <anchor id=a515.19>sín á miðle. Póll byscop tók við hónom með enne mesto s&oeacute;mð, <anchor id=a515.20>ok veitte hónom virðolega veizlo meðan hann vas; en leyste hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a515.21>á braut með mikelle stór-menzko, bæðe í fé-gi&aolig;fom, ok í annarre <anchor id=a515.22>virðing. Ioan byscop gaf m&aolig;nnom ráð til, hverso vin skal g&oelig;ra <anchor id=a516.1><pb id=pb516 n=516><note place=margin>[135: 10.]</note>af kr&oeacute;ke-berjom, efter því sem Sverrer konungr hafðe hónom fyrer <anchor id=a516.2>sagt. En svá bar til, at þá et næsta sumar efter gat nær hvarge<note place=apparatus id=an516.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hvarge]</ab> emend.; hverge, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a516.3>ber á Íslande: en sá maðr es Eirikr hét, ok bió skamt frá Scála-holte <anchor id=a516.4>á b&oeacute; þeim es heiter á Snorra-st&aolig;ðom, bar saman nockot vín, <anchor id=a516.5>ok varð vel, á því eno sama sumre. En Ioan byscop fór til Noregs<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a516.6>ok síðan til Róms, ok r&oeacute;dde hver-vetna, þar sem hann kom, frá <anchor id=a516.7>rausn ok tign Póls byscops.

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a516.8><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Á d&aolig;gom Póls byscops, þá es Giz&oelig;rr Hallz son hafðe l&aolig;g&shy;s&aolig;go, <anchor id=a516.9>þá geck mest af ser ranglæte manna um alner, bæðe <anchor id=a516.10>útlenzkra ok Íslenzkra manna, at eige þótte svá lengr vesa mega.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a516.11>Gaf (þá) þat ráð til Póll byscop, at menn skylde hafa stikor, þær <anchor id=a516.12>es være tveggia alna at<note place=apparatus id=an516.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> add. 384. lengð] ok motto þat menn mikit ok kvaðust under þat mál (sic), add. 384.</note> lengð; styrkðo þá aðrer h&aolig;fðingjar með <anchor id=a516.13>byscope, Giz&oelig;rr ok syner hans, Þórvaldr, ok Hallr<note place=apparatus id=an516.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok Hallr]</ab> add. 384.</note>, ok Magnus, <anchor id=a516.14>þat mál; einneg br&oeacute;ðr hans, Sæmundr, es þá vas g&aolig;fgaztr maðr <anchor id=a516.15>á &aolig;llo Íslande; ok Ormr, es bæðe vas l&aolig;g-spakr ok at flesto forvitre;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a516.16>ok aller h&aolig;fðingjar; ok vóro þá l&aolig;g á l&aolig;gð efter því sem <anchor id=a516.17>ofallt hefer haldesc síðan.

<p n=7.3><anchor id=a516.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Á eno siaunda áre byscopsdóms Póls byscops andaðesc <anchor id=a516.19>Absalon erki-byscop í Danm&aolig;rk, Benedictus-dag; ok á því eno <anchor id=a516.20>sama áre andaðesc Brandr byscop, Sixtus-dag, þá es hann hafðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a516.21>byscop vereð átta vetr ens fiórða tigar, enn meste sk&aolig;rungr. Efter <anchor id=a516.22>andlát Brannz byscops k&oelig;ro Norðlendingar til byscops Goðmund <pb id=pb517 n=517><note place=margin>[136: 11.]</note>prest Ara son, ok feck Póll byscop hónom bréf sín á fund Eiriks<note place=apparatus id=an517.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Eiriks]</ab> emend.; Einars, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a517.1>erki-byscops; ok vas Goðmundr vígðr til byscops í Þróndheime x <anchor id=a517.2>nóttom fyrer Ioans messo byscops; ok vas þá Hákon konungr <anchor id=a517.3>í Norege, son Sverriss konungs. Goðmundr byscop fór til Íslannz <anchor id=a517.5>et sama sumar, ok kom í Aust-fi&aolig;rðo, ok fundosc þeir Póll byscop,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a517.6>ok g&oelig;rðo mikla s&oeacute;mð sín í miðle í veizlo ok fé-gi&aolig;fom. Síðan <anchor id=a517.7>fór Goðmundr byscop til Hóla, ok sat þar at stóle með ó-h&oeacute;gendom <anchor id=a517.8>enom mestom fyrer margs saker. Auðræðe urðo brátt eige mikel, <anchor id=a517.9>en af-venzlor þótto varla með mikelle stillingo: en þeir sem fyrer <anchor id=a517.10>urðo, virðo hann heldr stirðan ok stríðan í sínom boðorðom: en<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a517.11>því vin-sælle varð Póll byscop ok ástsælle við alþýðo lannz-manna, <anchor id=a517.12>sem menn s&aoacute;<note place=apparatus id=an517.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> s&aoacute; 384; siá, Cd.</note> hver-vetna hans for-si&aoacute;, en h&oeacute;gende hans viðr-vistar <anchor id=a517.13>ok boðorða við alla þá es til hans &aoacute;tto (at) hníga; ok æsto<note place=apparatus id=an517.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>æsto]</ab> æsktu, Cd.</note> ser <anchor id=a517.14>slíks yfir-boða aller lannz-menn ef koste ætte.

<p n=7.4><anchor id=a517.15><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Póll byscop let telja í þeim þrimr fiórðungom lannz, es hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a517.16>vas byscop yfer, kirkjor þær es at skyldo<note place=apparatus id=an517.4><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at skyldo]</ab> 384; hann þurfte, Cd.</note> þurfte presta til at fá: ok <anchor id=a517.17>hann lét presta telja, hve marga þyrfte í hans sýslo; ok vóro þá <anchor id=a517.18>kirkjor xx ok cc tír&oelig;ð; en presta þurfte þá x miðr an ccc tí-r&oeacute;ð. <anchor id=a517.19>En því lét hann telja, at hann vilde leyfa útan-ferð prestom, ef <anchor id=a517.20>&oeacute;rner være efter í hans sýslo: en hann vilde ok fyrer siá, ef svá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a517.21>felle, at eige være presta-fátt í hans sýslo, meðan hann være <anchor id=a517.22>byscop.

<pb id=pb518 n=518><note place=margin>[137: 12.]</note>

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a518.1><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Á eno tolfta áre byscops dóms Póls byscops urðo þau <anchor id=a518.2>tíðende, es mikels vóro verð: þá andaðesc Giz&oelig;rr Hallz son tveim <anchor id=a518.3>nóttom fyrer Óláfs-messo. Um hann mælte Sæmundr, bróðer <anchor id=a518.4>Póls, þeim orðom, at hann være &lsquo;hrókr allz fagnaðar hvarge es <anchor id=a518.5>hann vas staddr.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=7.6><anchor id=a518.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þá kom eldr upp í Heclo-felle et þriðja sinn þrim<hi>r</hi> nóttom <anchor id=a518.7>fyrer Ambrosius-dag of vetrenn efter.

<p n=8.1><anchor id=a518.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Póll byscop vas svá mikell gæfo-maðr, at hónom gengo <anchor id=a518.9>nálega aller hluter at sólo enn fyrra hlut æve sínnar; <anchor id=a518.10>ok &dagger;þá hann svá þat<note place=apparatus id=an518.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá ... þat]</ab>? this is somehow wrong.</note> sem nú má nackvat heyra í hiúkolfe<note place=apparatus id=an518.2><ab type=textRef>hiúkolfe]</ab> what is this?</note> þeirrar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a518.11>frá-s&aolig;go es ek hefe frá sagt, eige marga hlute hiá því sem emne <anchor id=a518.12>ero til, at hann<note place=apparatus id=an518.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hann]</ab> 384; þat, Cd. ást-goðe] <hi>or</hi> ást-góðe, Cd.; astgoðr, 384.</note> þótte &aolig;llom m&aolig;nnom ást-goðe. En Allz-valdande <anchor id=a518.13>Goð g&oeacute;dde hann því meirr es ofarr vas, bæðe at auðr&oeacute;ðom ok <anchor id=a518.14>mann-virðingom. En ef þat ætla nockorer menn, at fyr ástar saker <anchor id=a518.15>hafa ek meira af teket um frá-s&aolig;gn of líf<note place=apparatus id=an518.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>of líf]</ab> emend.; æve ok lífs, Cd.</note> Póls byscops an emne sé<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a518.16>til seld, þá geta<note place=apparatus id=an518.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>geta]</ab> emend.; gera, Cd.</note> þeir eige rétt; þvi at þat stendr mer meirr í hog <anchor id=a518.17>at ek hafa mart merkilegt láteð efter liggja í frá-s&aolig;gn hans æve, <anchor id=a518.18>fyrer fá-fr&oeacute;ðes s&aolig;kom ok ú-gá, ok lete at ríta, heldr an þat, at ek <anchor id=a518.19>hafa ne-eitt loget í frá-s&aolig;gn.

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a518.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þann gæfo-hlut bar enn Póle byscope til handa þá es m&aolig;nnom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a518.21>þr&oelig;ngðe ó-áran, ok biloðo m&aolig;nnom s&aoacute;ð ok sæ-f&aolig;ng, ok vel flestr <anchor id=a519.1><pb id=pb519 n=519><note place=margin>[137: 12.]</note>vetrar við-búnaðr, ok r&aolig;skoðosc<note place=apparatus id=an519.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>r&aolig;skoðosc]</ab> emend.; rostaðest, Cd. 5. í] add. 384.</note> af því for-lag fénaðar fyrst, ok <anchor id=a519.2>síðan manna: þá tók hann þat ráð, með ási&aoacute; Þórvallz Giz&oelig;rar <anchor id=a519.3>sonar ok annarra vitra manna í sínne sveit, at heita á Goð ok helga <anchor id=a519.4>menn til ár-bótar, ok syngja þriú <hi lang=la>Pater Noster</hi> hvern dag til <anchor id=a519.5>dýrðar Goðe í minning ens helga Þorláks byscops, ok gefa hans<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a519.6>dag um sumaret sauða-nyt at morgin-mále, ok v&aolig;ndol heys af <anchor id=a519.7>kýr-fóðre hverjo, en m&aolig;rk af mi&oelig;l-vætt hverre: ok kom aldrege <anchor id=a519.8>síðan hallære meðan hann lifðe.

<p n=9.1><anchor id=a519.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> En af þvi at Goð vill eige ofallt efter-læte eino reyna <anchor id=a519.10>sína ást-vine; heldr vill hann sína menn al-g&oelig;rva<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a519.11>verða láta í freistnenne ok mann-raunonom, ef vel standasc, sem <anchor id=a519.12>hafa rauner af orðet<note place=apparatus id=an519.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>af orðet]</ab> read, á orðet?</note>:&mdash;

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a519.13><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Nú es Póll byscop skein í þeim blóma, at hans virðing ok <anchor id=a519.14>vegsemð geck ofallt í v&aolig;xt; en Herdís aflaðe þeirra hluta allra í <anchor id=a519.15>sínom sk&aolig;rungskap ok forsi&aoacute;, es staðrenn þurfte, í &aolig;llom g&oelig;r&shy;ninge<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a519.16>þeim es hafa þurfte; (þvi) at hon vas í allre<note place=apparatus id=an519.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>í allre]</ab> 384; allra, Cd.</note> um<hi>b</hi>-sýslo <anchor id=a519.17>nákvæmzt þeirra mála, es þ&aolig;rf vas<note place=apparatus id=an519.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mála, es þ&aolig;rf vas]</ab> emend.; manna es þar var, Cd.</note> heima at stað, ok at &aolig;llom &aolig;ðrom <anchor id=a519.18>búom þeirra es byscop átte: b&aolig;rn þeirra g&oelig;rðosc at-g&oelig;rve-menn <anchor id=a519.19>þegar á unga aldre: Loftr í hagleik ok lærdóme, ok vitrleik; <anchor id=a519.20>Ketill í skilningom<note place=apparatus id=an519.5><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>skilningom]</ab> thus; <hi>skill</hi>, handicraft?</note> ok rite; Halla í verknaðe ok bóc-fr&oeacute;ðe; Þóra<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a519.21>í hlýðne ok ástseme. En af þvi <hi>at</hi> Goð mæler svá í Goð-spialle, at <anchor id=a519.22>allt mál skal standa í tveggja eðr þriggja vitne, þá berr-ek framm <anchor id=a520.1><pb id=pb520 n=520><note place=margin>[138: 13.]</note>með mer vitne Ámunda smiðs, es bæðe vas merkr ok rétt-orðr. <anchor id=a520.2>Hann kvað víso þessa&mdash;

<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a520.3>Loft efler Goð gifto (gengr fæst af því) hæstre:
    <l><anchor id=a520.4>K&oeacute;nn styðr krafte sínom Ketils lán i&aolig;furr mána:
    <l><anchor id=a520.5>&OEacute;ztr lér æve baztrar allz dróttenn þer, Halla!<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a520.6>Dýrr magnar<note place=apparatus id=an520.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> magne, Cd.</note> þrif Þóro þengell h&aolig;foð-engla!
</lg>

<p><anchor id=a520.7>Slíko geck of þeirra hage ofallt, meðan þau &aoacute;tto of heilt at sitja.

<p n=10.1><anchor id=a520.8><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> En þá es Póll byscop hafðe seteð at stóle tolf vetr í <anchor id=a520.9>Scála-hollte, varð sá at-burðr, at Herdís fór heiman, <anchor id=a520.10>várit efter Pásca, í Skarð til búss þess es þau byscop &aoacute;tto; ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a520.11>skylde hon taka hiónom, ok um aðra hlute þá sýsla es þar þurfte. <anchor id=a520.12>Henne fylgðo b&aolig;rn hennar tvau, Ketill, ok Halla; en heima vas <anchor id=a520.13>með byscope Loftr ok Þóra.

<p><anchor id=a520.14>En þá es Herdís vas í Skarðe, þá g&oelig;rðe vatna-v&aolig;xt mikenn, ok <anchor id=a520.15>g&oelig;rðe &aoacute;na Þiórs-&aoacute; ó-reiða: en hon vilde heim koma at nefndom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a520.16>dege, af þvi at mart vas þat heima ó-ráðet es ætlað vas at hennar <anchor id=a520.17>skylde bíða. Lét hon síðan s&oeacute;kja skip, ok f&oeacute;ra til árennar; ok <anchor id=a520.18>fara þau síðan til skipsens, Herdís, Ketill, ok Halla, ok Ioan bróðer <anchor id=a520.19>Herdísar; ok Bi&aolig;rn hét prestr capalín<note place=apparatus id=an520.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> kapellan, Cd.</note> byscops sá es þeim fylgðe: <anchor id=a520.20>[Sigfús prestr Grímsson]<note place=apparatus id=an520.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sigfús prestr Gr.]</ab> add. by conj., see the following.</note>; Þórsteinn hét diacn or Skarðe; Goðrún<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a520.21>Þóroddz dótter ok systor-dótter Herdísar. Yfer &aoacute;na fór fyrst Ketill <anchor id=a521.1><pb id=pb521 n=521><note place=margin>[139: 13.]</note>ok Bi&aolig;rn, farar-skiótar ok reiðingar þeirra. Þá týndesc reið-hestr <anchor id=a521.2>Herdísar. Et &oelig;fsta sinn es yfer &aoacute;na skylde fara, vas á skipe, <anchor id=a521.3>Sigfús prestr<note place=apparatus id=an521.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>prestr]</ab> add. 384.</note> Grímsson, Þórsteinn diacn, Herdís ok Halla ok <anchor id=a521.4>Goðrún, en veðr nockot byljótt. En es þau kómo í straum þann <anchor id=a521.5>es skamt vas frá lande, því es þau skylde til fara, þá barsc þeim á,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a521.6>ok kastaðe skipeno under þeim: en þau fóro &aolig;ll í kaf; ok kómo <anchor id=a521.7>&aolig;ll upp síðan: ok vas þat heyrt til beggja þeirra m&oeacute;ðgna, at þær <anchor id=a521.8>sungo, ok f&aoacute;lo sik ok sáler sínar Goðe Alm&aoacute;tkom á hende. Skilðe <anchor id=a521.9>þar þá feigan ok ú-feigan: Sigfúse<note place=apparatus id=an521.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Sigfúse]</ab> 384; Sigfús, Cd.</note> sveif at lande; en Herdís, Halla, <anchor id=a521.10>ok Goðrún drucknoðo, ok Þórsteinn diacn; en Sigfúss vas þrekaðr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a521.11>miok es hann kom at lande; en ecki vas þeirra manna á lande es <anchor id=a521.12>knáleikr vas yfer. En Almáttegr Goð emnðe<note place=apparatus id=an521.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> endi, Cd.</note> &aolig;ll sín fyrer-heit, sá <anchor id=a521.13>es því hefer heiteð, at hann m&oelig;nde &lsquo;gefa huggon með hverjom <anchor id=a521.14>harme;&rsquo; ok (at) &lsquo;hann m&oelig;nde einskis framar freista, an hverr <anchor id=a521.15>m&oelig;nde bera mega, þess hann býðr<note place=apparatus id=an521.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>býðr]</ab> <hi>or</hi> bíðr?</note>.&rsquo; Ok sýnde Goð þat hvárt-tveggja<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a521.16>í þessom enom h&aolig;rmolega at-burð: þá huggon bar at<note place=apparatus id=an521.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>bar at]</ab> emend.; bratt, Cd. (b<hi rend=sup>r</hi>at).</note> með <anchor id=a521.17>harme, at enn sama dag fundosc &aolig;ll lík þeirra manna es þar h&aolig;fðo <anchor id=a521.18>faresc: ok vas sú huggan þá mest þeim es efter lifðo. En þat vas <anchor id=a521.19>þó lítt með <hi>g</hi>líkendom, nema Goð gæfe af sinne milde ok miskun&shy;seme; <anchor id=a521.20>af þvi at svá vas vatna-v&aolig;xtr mikell, at f&aoacute;m nóttom síðarr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a521.21>rak hestenn í Vestmanna-eyjar þann es þar hafðe faresc.

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a521.22><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En es þesse tíðende kómo til eyrna Póle byscope á náttar-þele <anchor id=a522.1><pb id=pb522 n=522><note place=margin>[139 : 13.]</note>váveiflega, þá sýndesc &aolig;llom, at Goð hefðe nær ætlað, hvat <anchor id=a522.2>hann m&oelig;nde bera mega: hann mátte ecki matar neyta; ok hann <anchor id=a522.3>hafðe eige svefn áðr líken vóro niðr sett; en þó leitaðe hann alla <anchor id=a522.4>at gleðja í því es hann mátte. En þó má hverr ætla, hvílíka <anchor id=a522.5>mann-raun hann hafðe; hafa misst með h&aolig;rmungo mannzens þess,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a522.6>es hann unne mest; en siá í sí-fello hrygð á b&aolig;rnom sínom ok <anchor id=a522.7>&aolig;llom þeim es hann átte fyrer at hyggja. Stillilega fór hann með <anchor id=a522.8>allre efter-g&oelig;rð efter þær, bæðe í fé-gi&aolig;fom við kenne-menn, ok <anchor id=a522.9>svá við fát&oeacute;ka menn; ok sá hann þat sem vas, at um allt þat es <anchor id=a522.10>miklo varðar, es &lsquo;betre sígande arðr an svífande<note place=apparatus id=an522.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>svífande]</ab> emend.; snuande (i. e. sniuande), Cd.</note>.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=10.3><anchor id=a522.11><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ár-tíð Herdísar ok þeirra manna, es líf sítt léto með henne, <anchor id=a522.12>es xiiij nóttom efter Crucis-messo um váret; ok vas þat margra <anchor id=a522.13>manna skylda, lærðra ok ó-lærðra, at minnasc hennar svá r&oeacute;kelega <anchor id=a522.14>ok ástsamlega sem enna skyldozto náonga, fyrer sakar margra <anchor id=a522.15>hennar dýrlegra mat-ráða.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=10.4><anchor id=a522.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Póll byscop veitte Þorláke, bróðor Herdísar, mikla huggon, <anchor id=a522.17>b&oelig;ðe í orðom ok stórmannlegom fé-gi&aolig;fom, þeim es hann gaf <anchor id=a522.18>hónom; ok virðe (hann) í &aolig;llom hlutom ecki minnr an áðr hann <anchor id=a522.19>misste hennar við: huggaðe byscop<note place=apparatus id=an522.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>byscop]</ab> emend.; &hstrok; (&hstrok; = bp.), 384.</note> Þorlák<note place=apparatus id=an522.3><ab type=textRef>Þorlák]</ab> emend.; &thornstrok;allt, Cd. (&thornstrok;allt <hi>for</hi> &thornstrok;lac).</note> ecki miðr efter frá-fall <anchor id=a522.20>hennar an sítt lið. Þóra dótter hans tók til forráða fyr innan stock<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a522.21>efter frá-fall móðor sínnar, með ást-samlegre ási&aoacute; f&aolig;ðor síns; ok <anchor id=a522.22>vas hon þá eige ellre an xiiij vetra g&aolig;mol, ok bar hon þat þó framm, <anchor id=a522.23>svá at þeim virðesc &aolig;llom bazt at<note place=apparatus id=an522.4><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> add. by emend.; hennar h., Cd.</note> hennar h&aoacute;ttom, sem kunnazt vas<note place=apparatus id=an522.5><ab type=lineNumRef>24.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas]</ab> voro, Cd.</note>.

<pb id=pb523 n=523><note place=margin>[140: 14.]</note>

<p><anchor id=a523.1>Byscop drap svá brátt yfer harm sínn, þann es hann hafðe beðet, <anchor id=a523.2>at flester menn þóttosc lítt á finna. En þó mego aller (menn) þat <anchor id=a523.3>at <hi>g</hi>líkendom ráða, at því olle meirr þolin-m&oeacute;ðe hans, ok at hann<note place=apparatus id=an523.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at hann]</ab> þat hann, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a523.4>vilde s&oeacute;ma<note place=apparatus id=an523.2><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>s&oeacute;ma]</ab> 384; sæmda, Cd.</note> við alþýðo í síno blíðlæte, an þat, at hónom genge or <anchor id=a523.5>hog sá harmr meðan hann lifðe.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=11.1><anchor id=a523.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> Póll byscop lét sialdan, nema þá es hótíðer være, <anchor id=a523.7>kenna kenningar hiá því sem áðr vas; ok virðe<note place=apparatus id=an523.3><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>virðe]</ab> 384; unde, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a523.8>hann þá enn &aolig;llom meira um vesa at sialdan næðe. En hann lét <anchor id=a523.9>nálega hvern helgan dag tvær messor syngja: fióra daga kende <anchor id=a523.10>hann sialfr kenningar á hverjom tolf m&aoacute;noðom, Ióla-dag enn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a523.11>fyrsta<note place=apparatus id=an523.4><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> dag enn fyrstan, Cd.</note>, ok Miðvico-dag enn fyrsta í F&aolig;sto, Scír-dag, ok Kirkjo-dag, <anchor id=a523.12>en þvi at eins fleire daga, at hónom þ&oeacute;tte nockor nauðsyn <anchor id=a523.13>til bera.

<p><anchor id=a523.14>En því get ek slíkra hluta við, es glíkt<note place=apparatus id=an523.5><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>glíkt]</ab> emend.; olikt, Cd. (&lsquo;g&rsquo; faded in archetypus).</note> hafa g&oelig;rt þeir menn es <anchor id=a523.15>orð-vandazter<note place=apparatus id=an523.6><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>orð-vand.]</ab> emend.; auð-v., Cd.</note> ero ok vel kunnande<note place=apparatus id=an523.7><ab type=textRef>kunnande]</ab> kunnu, Cd.</note>, ok þat er<hi>o</hi> mest g&oeacute;ðe þeim es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a523.16>efter lifa, at menn mege þeirra d&oeacute;me sem flest vita, es &aolig;llom sé <anchor id=a523.17>gótt efter at glíkja.

<p><anchor id=a523.18>Á hverjom gistingar-stað hafðe hann for-mála sialfr, eða feck <anchor id=a523.19>annan mann til, þá es hann hafðe yfer-f&aolig;r um sýslo sína nockor<note place=apparatus id=an523.8><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>nockor]</ab> emend.; nockut, Cd.</note>.

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a523.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þiónoðo hónom ymser menn: fyrst Þórkell prestr Hallz son,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a523.21>góðr kenne-maðr ok ráð-vandr, nockora vetr, unz hann rézc (í) <anchor id=a524.1><pb id=pb524 n=524><note place=margin>[141 : 15]</note>canoca setr. Efter þat þiónaðe hónom Leggr prestr siau &aoacute;r; en <anchor id=a524.2>síðan Norðlenzkr prestr sá es Bi&aolig;rn hét, lítell maðr vexte, en þó <anchor id=a524.3>vitr ok vel lærðr ok fóstre Brannz byscops, hann fór útan síðan. <anchor id=a524.4>Efter þat þiónaðe hónom Brandr prestr Dales son, es áðr hafðe <anchor id=a524.5>enn byscopom þiónat, Brande ok Goðmunde byscopom. Ketill<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a524.6>prestr Hermundar<note place=apparatus id=an524.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Herm.]</ab> 384; Hamundar, Cd.</note> son vas ok hans þiónosto-maðr, áðr hann <anchor id=a524.7>andaðesc; ok hann varð-veitte at staðnom cór<note place=apparatus id=an524.2><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> <ab type=textRef>cór]</ab> 384; conor(!), Cd.</note> ok kenne-menn <anchor id=a524.8>efter frá-fall Póls byscops. Af því léto ener fyrre byscopar enn <anchor id=a524.9>sama ser þióna ofallt, hverr þeirra, at þeir sýndo staðfeste ok iamnlynde <anchor id=a524.10>skaps síns í því sem í m&aolig;rgo &aolig;ðro. En því let Póll byscop<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a524.11>ser ymsa þióna, at hónom þótte því betr, es fleire tignaðesc<note place=apparatus id=an524.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> -oðosc (indic.), Cd.</note> ok <anchor id=a524.12>g&aolig;fgaðesc af hónom; en hvers s&oeacute;mð vas með góðre virðingo <anchor id=a524.13>meðan hónom þiónaðe, hvat sem fyrer lagðesc síðan.

<p n=12.1><anchor id=a524.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> Í þann tíð (es) Herdís andaðesc, tóko til vandh&oeacute;fe <anchor id=a524.15>mála Norðlendinga, Goðmundar byscops ok Kolbeins<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a524.16>Tuma sonar. En svá sem vitað es, at alla lannz-menn tóko <anchor id=a524.17>með miklom ó-h&oeacute;gendom þeirra vandreðe, þá sat þó Póll byscop <anchor id=a524.18>fyrstr allra manna fyrer þeim vanda, es ecki vas áðr ...<note place=apparatus id=an524.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef> ... ]</ab> something either missing or wrong.</note> í Norðlendinga <anchor id=a524.19>fiórðunge. En hann vas í svá vandan sess komenn um <anchor id=a524.20>20 þat mál; þvi at erki-byscop hafðe sent hónom bréf sín með insiglom, <anchor id=a524.21>at hann skylde styðja ok styrkja, efter því sem hann hefðe <anchor id=a524.22>f&aolig;ng ok f&oeacute;re á, m&aoacute;l Goðmundar byscops: en Kolbeins mál studdo <anchor id=a524.23>marger ást-viner Póls byscops, ok frændr ok tengða-menn, þeir es <anchor id=a525.1><pb id=pb525 n=525><note place=margin>[141: 15.]</note>hann vilde í &aolig;llo ástúð sýna, en mátte ecki at g&oelig;ra<note place=apparatus id=an525.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>en m. ecki at g&oelig;ra]</ab> conj.; miok þeim ecka, 384, Cd. (corrupt).</note>. En þeim <anchor id=a525.2>r&aoacute;ðom vas eige h&oeacute;gt saman at koma, es Goðmunde byscope <anchor id=a525.3>þótte ser ecki veitt vesa, nema Póll byscop st&oeacute;ðe á &aolig;ndorðan<note place=apparatus id=an525.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> ond-verðan, Cd.</note> <anchor id=a525.4>meið með hónom; ok hann virðe hvártke mennena né lannz-l&aolig;gen, <anchor id=a525.5>en forboðaðe eða bann-sette hvern þeirra es nockot<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a525.6>vildo móte hans vilja g&oelig;ra: en Póll byscop vas í m&aolig;rgo sinne <anchor id=a525.7>góðr í biðom, þótt eige være allt efter því g&oelig;rt sem hann sá at <anchor id=a525.8>bazt sómðe; ok g&oelig;rðe hann ser ok Goðe þann veg marga at <anchor id=a525.9>ávexte, &dagger; at (hann) hirte aðra hóglega; en þó nento eige aðrer<note place=apparatus id=an525.3><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> Somehow wrong.</note> <anchor id=a525.10>ofallt ílla at hafa. En Goðmundr byscop vægðesc, eige við<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a525.11>þá menn meirr es í Póls byscops sýslo vóro, at eige forboðaðe <anchor id=a525.12>hann þá eðr bann-sette, þegar es þeir d&oeacute;mðo þá dóma es hónom <anchor id=a525.13>vóro eigi (við) skap, þótt l&aolig;g-dómr være. En Póll byscop lét eige <anchor id=a525.14>þau um-mæle bíta menn; en þó lagðe hann á h&aolig;nd þeim nockora <anchor id=a525.15>lítla script, til varúðar þeim m&aolig;nnom es fyrer því urðo eðr á-netjoðosc<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a525.16>hans banne; af þvi at hann unne betr sínom m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a525.17>&dagger;at hafa ...<note place=apparatus id=an525.4><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> corrupt; &lsquo;tvo goð,&rsquo; Cd.; nockoð, 384. The text is here unsafe.</note> heldr an sitja í nockorom ótta hvárt þeim mætte þat <anchor id=a525.18>nockoð granda eðr ecke.

<p n=12.2><anchor id=a525.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> En es þeirra vandræðe gengo svá miok af ser, at þeir &aoacute;tto <anchor id=a525.20>bardaga þann es Kolbeinn fell í, ok marger aðrer neyter menn,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a525.21>bæðe lærðer ok ó-lærðer, en léto vine sína<note place=apparatus id=an525.5><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vine sína]</ab> conj.; limar sínar, Cd.</note> þeir es efter vóro ....<note place=apparatus id=an525.6><ab type=textRef>...]</ab> something missing.</note> <anchor id=a525.22>En efter þat g&oelig;rðo þeir byscop at-farar at þeim es efter lifðo ok <anchor id=a526.1><pb id=pb526 n=526><note place=margin>[142: 15.]</note>nánazter Kolbeine ok st&oelig;kðo<note place=apparatus id=an526.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> stockðo (stucku) þeir, Cd., 384.</note> þeim í braut, en eignoðo ser &aolig;ll <anchor id=a526.2>þeirra fé, en k&aolig;lloðo þá í banne. En es Póll byscop varð þessara <anchor id=a526.3>ó-tíðenda víss<note place=apparatus id=an526.2><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>víss]</ab> víss ok var, Cd.</note>, þá bað hann sína vine, at þeir skylde eige g&oelig;ra <anchor id=a526.4>bráða at-f&aolig;r at þeim. Ok bar þat til þess at hann vilde vænta<note place=apparatus id=an526.3><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vilde vænta]</ab> ?</note> at <anchor id=a526.5>&lsquo;blóð-nætr sé hverjom bráðaztar,&rsquo; ok þat m&oelig;nde sannasc sem mælt<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a526.6>es, ok ætlaðe með meire stillingo ok ráðe faret verða, ef lengr<note place=apparatus id=an526.4><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> lenge, Cd.</note> være <anchor id=a526.7>biðat. En hann vætte í &aolig;ðro lage at Goðmundr byscop m&oelig;nde <anchor id=a526.8>mis-smíðe á siá, hve<note place=apparatus id=an526.5><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hve]</ab> hvat, Cd.</note> miket at vas orðet, ok munde bióða góð boð <anchor id=a526.9>til sættar ok s&oeacute;mðar þeim es til efter-mála-vóro<note place=apparatus id=an526.6><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>til efter-mála-vóro]</ab> emend.; þeim er efter voro, Cd.</note>. En es þat drógsc <anchor id=a526.10>undan; en spurðesc í &aolig;ðro lage ágangr þeirra á hendr m&aolig;nnom,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a526.11>ok r&aoacute;n ok áverkar ok allz-kyns ó-hætter nálega, þá sende Póll <anchor id=a526.12>byscop capalín sínn Bi&aolig;rn til fundar við Goðmund byscop, at <anchor id=a526.13>biðja, at hann leiðrétte ok lægðe vandræðe þeirra með yfer-bótom; <anchor id=a526.14>ok bauzc til under-st&aolig;ðo með hónom aðallega<note place=apparatus id=an526.7><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>aðallega]</ab> conject.; naliga, Cd. (aþaliga).</note> sem þyrfte&mdash;ef hann <anchor id=a526.15>dr&oeacute;gesc eige sialfr undan&mdash;sínn góðvilja ok sín efne þau es hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a526.16>hefðe f&aolig;ng á, í auðræðom eða í &aolig;ðrom til-l&aolig;gom. &dagger; Vas þat auð-sýnt <anchor id=a526.17>....<note place=apparatus id=an526.8><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> something missing.</note> let-orð Póls byscops norðr-farar h&aolig;fðingja fyrst um <anchor id=a526.18>hausteð, meðan harmr manna vas nýjaztr ok &dagger; sízt dofnaðr<note place=apparatus id=an526.9><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sízt dofnaðr]</ab> corrupt; read, sáttar-stofnan ....?</note> af sárleik <anchor id=a526.19>manna missis..... En síðan vas þess leitað<note place=apparatus id=an526.10><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vas þess leitað]</ab> conj.; var leitað, Cd.; the text is here unsafe.</note> við Goðmund byscop, <anchor id=a526.20>at hann ynne<note place=apparatus id=an526.11><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ynne]</ab> unne, Cd.</note> þeim (es) efter lifðo sína frændr g&aolig;fga ok góða, auð-veldre<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a526.21>leiðrétte sínna harm-saka, an nú .... vilde firra háska, meðan <anchor id=a527.1><pb id=pb527 n=527><note place=margin>[143: 16.]</note>kostr være, Goðmund byscop ok hans fylgðar-menn. En Goðmundr <anchor id=a527.2>byscop þekðesc þat eige, ok virðe hann vesa vin-hallan under <anchor id=a527.3>h&aolig;fðingja í slíkre um-leitan. En þat sýndesc þá brátt með hverre <anchor id=a527.4>vizko at vas hvárs<note place=apparatus id=an527.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hvárs]</ab> hvers, Cd.</note> þeirra for-si&aoacute;; af þvi at á sama áre fóro h&aolig;fðingjar <anchor id=a527.5>til Hóla, ok r&aoacute;ko Goðmund byscop af stólnom; ok ruddo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a527.6>á braut fiolða íll-þýðis es þar vas, seker menn ok ráns-menn, ok <anchor id=a527.7>reyfarar; ok dr&aoacute;po suma: ok varð þá at riúfasc sú illinga-seta; <anchor id=a527.8>ok urðo þá ok þaðan frá góð forl&aolig;g manna. Póll byscop bauð til <anchor id=a527.9>sín Goðmunde byscope með g&oeacute;zko ok góðvilja; þá<note place=apparatus id=an527.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá]</ab> þag, Cd.</note> hann þat eige, <anchor id=a527.10>ok g&oelig;rðe at við-si&aoacute;m at finna hann, þvi at hann vilde eige hlýða<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a527.11>hans heil-ræðom.

<p n=13.1><anchor id=a527.12><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> Í þann tíð fór útan Loftr son Póls byscops, ok sótte <anchor id=a527.13>heim tigna menn í &aolig;ðrom l&aolig;ndom, Biarna byscop í <anchor id=a527.14>Orkneyjom; en efter þat Inga konung í Norege ok Hákon iarl <anchor id=a527.15>bróðor hans, ok þá af þeim virðolegar giafar ok fé-miklar. En es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a527.16>byscop sat í þeirre áhyggjo um son sínn, ok um frétter aðrar hverso <anchor id=a527.17>þá genge, þá gladde Goð hann svá á eino sumre, at Loftr kom þá <anchor id=a527.18>út með góðre virðingo ok fé-miklom gi&aolig;fom, es hann hafðe þeget; <anchor id=a527.19>ok kunne þat at segja, at hann hefðe f&aolig;ðor síns mest noteð hvar <anchor id=a527.20>sem hann kom.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=13.2><anchor id=a527.21><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Á því sumre komo út g&oelig;rsemar þær es Þórer erki-byscop <anchor id=a527.22>af Norege hafðe sendar Póle byscope, córona goll-saumoð, <anchor id=a528.1><pb id=pb528 n=528><note place=margin>[143: 16.]</note>sú es enge hafðe fyrr iam-góð komeð til Íslannz, fingr-goll dýrlegt <anchor id=a528.2>ok glófar virðoleger. En annat sumar efter, þá<note place=apparatus id=an528.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> thus 384; homoiotel. in Cd. from þá-þá.</note> es Póll byscop <anchor id=a528.3>hafðe sextán vetr at stóle seteð í Scála-holte, þá kómo enn út <anchor id=a528.4>g&oelig;rsemar ágætlegar, es Nicholas byscop af Osló sende Póle <anchor id=a528.5>byscope, fingr-goll miket, es vá tvá aura, ok steinn í virðolegr: ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a528.6>hann sende hónom balsam svá mikenn, at ván vas at þat yrðe <anchor id=a528.7>aldregi at vandræðom síðan; en ecki vas annat iamn-toro-gætt es <anchor id=a528.8>at skyldo þurfte at hafa; hafðe þat ok kostað eige minna an <anchor id=a528.9>nockorar merkr brennz silfrs.

<p n=13.3><anchor id=a528.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þess es ok skylt at geta, at Póll byscop sende ok margar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a528.11>giafar útan sínom vinom; bæðe vóro þat valer, ok aðrar g&oelig;rsemar. <anchor id=a528.12>Hann sende Þóre erki-byscope byscops-staf af t&aolig;nn <anchor id=a528.13>g&oelig;rvan, svá haglega, at enge maðr hafðe fyrr sét iam-vel g&oelig;rvan <anchor id=a528.14>á Íslande, es smíðat hafðe Margret en Haga, es þá vas odd-h&aolig;gozt <anchor id=a528.15>allra manna á Íslande. Þau vóro þá bæðe hiú í Scála-holte es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a528.16>Póll byscop andaðesc, ok hafðe Þórer prestr, bónde hennar, þar þá <anchor id=a528.17>&aolig;ll fiár-forr&aoacute;ð; en hon g&oelig;rðe slíkt allt sem byscop<note place=apparatus id=an528.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>byscop]</ab> 384 (bp.); hann (&hstrok;), Cd.</note> vilde. Póll <anchor id=a528.18>byscop hafðe láteð til taka at g&oelig;ra tabolo fyrer altare, áðr hann <anchor id=a528.19>skilðe við, ok ætlaðe þar til miket fé, bæðe í golle ok silfre; ok <anchor id=a528.20>Margrét gróf ok t&aolig;nn til, ágæta vel; ok es þess v&aoacute;n, at þat munde<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a528.21>en mesta g&oelig;rseme verða, af fyrer-hyggjo hans, en þau Þórsteinn <anchor id=a528.22>scrín-smiðr ok Margrét semðe<note place=apparatus id=an528.3><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>semðe]</ab> sende, Cd.</note> síðan af hagleik sínom. Varð þat <anchor id=a528.23>mikell svarta-svipr at hans frá-falle, at þá urðo slíker hluter fyrst <anchor id=a529.1><pb id=pb529 n=529><note place=margin>[144: 17.]</note>staðar at nema í bráð, fyrer annara fiol-skylda saker. Þórsteinn <anchor id=a529.2>vas ráðenn til tabolo smíðar. Þat sumar et sama, es byscop lifðe <anchor id=a529.3>síðazt, kom út húfo-viðr or Norege, sá es Póll byscop hafðe <anchor id=a529.4>h&oelig;ggva láteð: ok þá gaf hann í h&aolig;nd &aolig;ll kaup þau til staðarens, <anchor id=a529.5>es at skylldo þurfte<note place=apparatus id=an529.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> þyrftu, Cd.</note> at hafa.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=13.4><anchor id=a529.6><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Nú ero sagðer þeir hluter, es vel fello í hag á því sumre. Þá <anchor id=a529.7>skal ek geta þeirra hluta, es miok þótto and-streymer: þá varð <anchor id=a529.8>land-skialfte mikell enn næsta dag fyrer Seljo-manna-messo, ok <anchor id=a529.9>léto marger menn líf sítt; ok fell ofan al-hýse á fiolða b&oeacute;jom, <anchor id=a529.10>ok g&oelig;rðo ena st&oeacute;rsto skaða. Þá var ok þerra-leyse et mesta, ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a529.11>urðo stór-skaðar at<note place=apparatus id=an529.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> á, Cd.</note> því. Þá vas ok sagt út andlát Kl&oeacute;ngs Þórvallz <anchor id=a529.12>sonar es enn vænzte þótte til mikels h&aolig;fðingja ef lífe hélde.

<p n=14.1><anchor id=a529.13><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> Þat sumar tók sótt ok ó-h&oeacute;gende mikel Póll byscop <anchor id=a529.14>þá es hann fór um Vestfirðinga-fiórðung, ok komsc <anchor id=a529.15>hann nauðolega til Hitar-dals; lá hann þar í reckjo nálega fiórar<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a529.16>vicor; síðan fór hann heim með lítlom mætte; ok kom heim í <anchor id=a529.17>Scála-holt þrimr nóttom fyrer Simons-messo; ok lagðesc þá þegar <anchor id=a529.18>í reckjo. Hann s&oelig;ng messo Allra-Heilagra-messo-dag, ok s&oelig;ng <anchor id=a529.19>þá síðozto messo Goðe Alm&aoacute;tkom til dýrðar ok &aolig;llom Helgom, <anchor id=a529.20>en ser til hialpar ok miskunnar, ok &aolig;llom Cristnom m&aolig;nnom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a529.21>lifondom ok &aolig;ndoðom. En fyrer Marteins-messo tók at ó-h&oeacute;gjasc <anchor id=a530.1><pb id=pb530 n=530><note place=margin>[145: 17.]</note>með verkjom miklom sótt hans, ok fylgðe bæðe svefn-leyse ok <anchor id=a530.2>mat-leyse; ok þótte hann þá einvænn<note place=apparatus id=an530.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> Emend.; einrænn, Cd.</note> vesa. Þar vóro þá syner <anchor id=a530.3>hans ok br&oeacute;ðr ok marger aðrer viner hans.

<p n=14.2><anchor id=a530.4><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Efter þat sende Póll byscop efter Þórvalde ok Magnuse <anchor id=a530.5>Gizorar sonom, ok kómo þeir í Scála-holt, ok skipaðe hann þá til<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a530.6>allra hluta fyrer þeim, efter sínom vilja. En hann vas oleaðr <anchor id=a530.7>octabo-dag Martini. En áðr være smurðr helgo við-smi&oelig;rve, <anchor id=a530.8>mælte hann miok langt mál at d&oeacute;mom ens helga Þorláks byscops: <anchor id=a530.9>í átte hann þá á h&aolig;nd ser fyrer &aolig;llom lærðom m&aolig;nnom, þeirra es <anchor id=a530.10>við vóro, freklega alla hlute, es hann virðe sik hent hafa til varúðar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a530.11>í sínom byscopsdóme; ok bað alla, at hónom skylde fyrer-gefa <anchor id=a530.12>þat es hann hafðe mis-g&oelig;rt við þá. En hann fyrer-gaf &aolig;llom <anchor id=a530.13>blíðlega þat es við hann h&aolig;fðo mis-g&oelig;rt; ok fal sik under Goðs <anchor id=a530.14>miskunn.

<p n=14.3><anchor id=a530.15><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En efter þat vas hann oleaðr, ok<note place=apparatus id=an530.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok]</ab> emend.; om. Cd.</note> vas nockot rén á hans sótt<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a530.16>unz hann fór af smurningar-klæðom, ok tvær nætr síðan. En þá <anchor id=a530.17>tók at élna<note place=apparatus id=an530.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>élna]</ab> emend.; fella, Cd.</note> ó-h&oelig;gende sóttar hans af nýjo; ok lifðe hann þá eige <anchor id=a530.18>lengr an tvær nætr síðan, ok tók hann þá <hi lang=la>Corpus Domini</hi> við sialft <anchor id=a530.19>andlát sítt; ok sofnaðe þá til Goðs.

<p n=14.4><anchor id=a530.20><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En vico fyrer andlát Póls byscops sýndesc tungl svá sem<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a530.21>roðra være; ok gaf eige liós af ser um mið-nætte í heið-viðre; ok <anchor id=a530.22>bauð þat þá þegar mikla ógn m&aolig;rgom manne.

<p n=14.5><anchor id=a530.23><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Póll vas vígðr til byscops á d&aolig;gom Celestinus pava af Ab&shy;salone <anchor id=a531.1><pb id=pb531 n=531><note place=margin>[145: 18.]</note>erki-byscope, á d&aolig;gom Sverress konungs: þá vas hann <anchor id=a531.2>fer-t&oelig;gr at aldre. Hann stýrðe Goðs Cristne með mikelle stillingo <anchor id=a531.3>sextán vetr, ok andaðesc þriðja dag vico, einne nótt fyrer Andreas-messo. <anchor id=a531.4>Ok vas þá liðet frá Goðs burð fiogor &aoacute;r ens þrettánda <anchor id=a531.5>hundraðs.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=14.6><anchor id=a531.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Are prestr enn Fróðe, es m&aolig;rg d&oeacute;me spakleg hefer saman-t&aolig;lð, <anchor id=a531.7>seger hve miok várt land drúpðe<note place=apparatus id=an531.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> drupnaðe, Cd.; driupte, 384.</note> efter frá-fall Giz&oelig;rar byscops, <anchor id=a531.8>es menn virðo mestan sk&aolig;rung veret hafa á Íslande. En her má <anchor id=a531.9>siá, hverso margr kvíð-bióðr<note place=apparatus id=an531.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> kvíðboge, 384 (mod. form).</note> hefer faret fyrer frá-falle þessa ens <anchor id=a531.10>dýrlega h&aolig;fðingja Póls byscops: i&aolig;rðen skalf &aolig;ll ok pipraðe af<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a531.11>ótta; himinn ok skýen gréto, svá at mikell hlutr spilltesc iarðar <anchor id=a531.12>ávaxtarens; en himin-tunglen sýndo dauða-t&aoacute;kn ber<note place=apparatus id=an531.3><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ber]</ab> emend.; her, Cd.</note> á ser, þá es <anchor id=a531.13>nálega vas komet at enom &oelig;fstom lífs-stundom Póls byscops; en <anchor id=a531.14>siórenn brann ok fyrer landeno þá, þar sem hans byscopsdómr stóð <anchor id=a531.15>yfer. Sýndosc<note place=apparatus id=an531.4><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> Syndist, Cd.</note> nálega allar h&aolig;foð-skepnor nockot hrygðar-mark á<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a531.16>ser sýna yfer<note place=apparatus id=an531.5><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>yfer]</ab> conj.; frá, Cd.</note> hans frá-falle.

<p n=14.7><anchor id=a531.17><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Ena síðosto nótt es Póll byscop lifðe, dreymðe Þórvald <anchor id=a531.18>Giz&oelig;rar son, enn vitrazta h&aolig;fðingja, at Ioan Loftz son f&oeacute;le Petre <anchor id=a531.19>Postola á hende þá hi&aolig;rð, es Póll byscop sonr hans hafðe gætt: <anchor id=a531.20>en Iesus Christr fal sína hi&aolig;rð á hende<note place=apparatus id=an531.6><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hende]</ab> hendr, Cd.</note> F&aolig;ðor sínom áðr hann<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a531.21>være píndr, en Póll byscop fal sik ok hána<note place=apparatus id=an531.7><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fal sik ok h.]</ab> en P. bp. bifalaðe (mod.) sik ok hana á v. Alm. <anchor id=a531.22>G. áðr hann v. f. o. k., Cd., but the clause is unsafe.</note> á vald Almáttegs Goðs, <anchor id=a531.23>áðr órr faðer ok gætande vas frá oss kallaðr.


<pb id=pb532 n=532><p n=15.1><note place=margin>[146 : 19.]</note>

<anchor id=a532.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> Nú má siá hvárn-tveggja stafn byscopsdóms þessa <anchor id=a532.2>ens dýrlega byscops; ok hyggjom ver á þeirre tíð <anchor id=a532.3>hafe eige ....<note place=apparatus id=an532.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> corrupt text; aðrer til veret, Cd.; for the supposed sense see translation.</note> at siá skut-stafnenn, es eige langaðe til at siá fram-stafnenn.

<p n=15.1.1><anchor id=a532.5>En við þat es oss at una hans ást-m&aolig;nnom es efter lifom, at<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a532.6>hann hefer nálega &aolig;ll þau g&oeacute;ðe efter sik leift, es menn mego efter <anchor id=a532.7>hafa góðs mannz ok g&aolig;fogs: b&aolig;rn virðoleg með góðom efnom til <anchor id=a532.8>skaða-bóta þeim, es mest niðr-fall es orðet í andláte Póls byscops; <anchor id=a532.9>auðr gnógr, ok allz-kyns staðar-prýðe, flest framm komen, en sum <anchor id=a532.10>stofnoð með góðom efnom; heilræðe hans með kenningom, þeim<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a532.11>es hann kennde í sí-fello í orðom ok f&aolig;grom d&oeacute;mom síns lífs; <anchor id=a532.12>auðræðe ok unaz-vister<note place=apparatus id=an532.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> Emend.; unaðs-samar, Cd.; unar-vister, 384.</note>, es hann ætlaðe vel flestom sínom n&aoacute;nom <anchor id=a532.13>frændom. En hann mon til þess hogt hafa at Goð mone þá <anchor id=a532.14>hugga, es hann hefer eige einkom<note place=apparatus id=an532.3><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>einkom]</ab> add. 384.</note> fé huggaða.

<p n=15.1.2><anchor id=a532.15>En þessa s&aolig;go mína styrkðe vitr maðr, Ámunde Arna son smiðr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a532.16>Póls byscops, ok kveðr vísor þessar:


<lg>
    <l><anchor id=a532.17>Réð Goðs laga greiðer (góð var stiórn yfer þióðom)
    <l><anchor id=a532.18>sextán vetr enn snotre, sólar, byscops-stóle:
    <l><anchor id=a532.19>Nú er mein-b&aolig;nnoðr manna mál-sniallr heðan kallaðr
    <l><anchor id=a532.20>(Kome Póll í frið fullan fliótt) með himna Dróttne,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>
    <l><anchor id=a532.21>Dáð-hitter gat Dróttens dýrr Goðs<note place=apparatus id=an532.4><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dýrr Goðs]</ab> dýr geðr, Cd.</note> l&aolig;gom stýra
    <l><anchor id=a532.22>(sætt<note place=apparatus id=an532.5><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sætt]</ab> emend.; sitt, Cd.</note> bió sann-vinr rétta) sextán vetr til betra
    <l><anchor id=a532.23>hyggjom hitt at segja, hialp-ríkom vel líka
    <l><anchor id=a532.24>gagn vann af hug creinom hans &aolig;nn Goðe ok m&aolig;nnom.<note place=apparatus id=an532.6><ab type=lineNumRef>23&ndash;24.</ab> Text partly unsafe.</note>
    <pb id=pb533 n=533><note place=margin>[147: 20.]</note><l><anchor id=a533.1>Lýðr á allr fyr eyðe &oelig;r-sætes við Goð mætan,
    <l><anchor id=a533.2>Þeim er g&oelig;rðe frið fyrða, far-sælom vel mæla:
    <l><anchor id=a533.3>B&oeacute;nom brátt at skíne blíð-geðr hæfoð-feðra
    <l><anchor id=a533.4>Þeim es ýta b&aolig;l b&oeacute;ter, byscop órr, með córa.
</lg>


<p n=15.2><anchor id=a533.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þá sextán vetr, es Goðs Cristne prýddesc under blóma<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a533.6>byscopsdóms Póls byscops, urðo m&aolig;rg stór-tíðende í heimenom: <anchor id=a533.7>þá andaðesc Celestinus Páve; Absalon erki-byscop: Sverrer <anchor id=a533.8>konungr, Hákon, Gothormr Noregs konungar: Knútr, S&oelig;rkver <anchor id=a533.9>Svia konungar; Ríkarðr Engla konungr: Niall byscop; Brandr <anchor id=a533.10>byscop; Ioan byscop: Haraldr iarl í Orkneyjom; Philippus iarl:<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a533.11>Einarr ábóte Márs son; Goðmundr Bialfa son ábóte; Hafliðe <anchor id=a533.12>ábóte Þórvallz son; Þórkell ábóte Skúms son.

<p n=15.2.1><anchor id=a533.13>Marger hafa ok aðrer g&aolig;fger menn andasc meðan Póll byscop vas, <anchor id=a533.14>bæðe lærðer menn ok ó-lærðer: Ioan Loptz son; Giz&oelig;rr Hallz son; <anchor id=a533.15>Sigmundr Orms son; Þórleifr Þorláks son; Þórvaldr Þórkels son;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a533.16>Kalfr Snorra son; Are Biarnar son; Onundr Þórkels son; Hermundr <anchor id=a533.17>Coðrans son; Þórðr Snorra son; Goðmundr Ámunda son; <anchor id=a533.18>Berse prestr Halldórs son.

<p n=15.2.2><anchor id=a533.19>Ok mart varð annat til tíðenda í hans byscopsdóme: skipa-tión; <anchor id=a533.20>ok ellz upp-kváma í Heklo-felle; ó-friðr, rán, ok brennor; ok með<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a533.21>m&aolig;rgom fa-tíðendom líflát manna.


<p n=15.2.3><anchor id=a533.22>[<hi>Epilogue.</hi>]

<p n=15.3><anchor id=a533.23><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Nú hefe-ek yfer faret nockvot með skyndingo æve Póls <anchor id=a533.24>byscops; ok hefer mer meirr til<note place=apparatus id=an533.1><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>til]</ab> á, Cd. (at?).</note> genget ú-k&oeacute;nska an illvile, þó at <anchor id=a534.1><pb id=pb534 n=534><note place=margin>[148: 20.]</note>þesse frá-saga sé eige iamn-merkileg orðen, sem hann hafðe efne <anchor id=a534.2>til sett af sínne h&aolig;lfo.

<p n=15.3.1><anchor id=a534.3>Gleðe Goð Almáttogr hann í sí-fello í eilífre dýrð. Amen.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->



<div2 id=en.pols lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">
<head><hi rend=sc>The Life of Bishop Paul.</hi>

<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Paul was the son of that most noble man John, the son of Loft, the son of Sæ-mund the historian. John&apos;s mother was Thora, daughter of king Magnus Barefoot; and Paul&apos;s mother was Rag-neid, daughter of <pb id=pb503a n=503>Thor-hall, and sister of Saint Thor-lac the bishop. Paul was brought up in Ord with John his father, and he himself, and others also, ever held him [Paul] in greater esteem the elder he grew.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Paul was a goodly man to look on, fair-eyed and steady-eyed, curly-haired and fair-haired, well-limbed and small-footed, bright-coloured and fair-skinned, a man of middle stature, and of all men most courtly of carriage. He was quick and well learned when he was young, and skilful at everything he did, both writing and other things.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> He married young, taking to wife Herdis Cetil&apos;s daughter, a fair woman, and of good skill in all that should adorn a lady.

<p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> But when they had been a winter together Paul went abroad, and became the man of Harold, earl in the Orkneys, who held him in great esteem. And afterwards he went south to England, and was there at school, and got great learning there, so that there was scarce any example of any man having got so deep and so much knowledge in the like time. And so when he came back to Iceland, he surpassed all other men in his courtliness and his learning, and in making of [Latin] verse, and in book-lore. He was also so great a singer and musician that his song and voice excelled those of all other men that were living in his day.

<p n=1.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> At this time he went back again to stay at Ord, and there he was ever in great favour, as was his due. But a little later Paul set up housekeeping at Scard, but at first there was but little of all that <pb id=pb504a n=504>was needed, but the wise husbandry of both husband and wife, and the good-will and help of their friends, stood them in such good stead that within a short time they had plenty of everything. Yet they met with very great losses of stock; but they took it all well and bravely, and indeed it was soon as if there had been none, for their stock increased as fast as the flood-tide coming up the shore.

<p n=1.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Paul was trusty and of few words, and affable to all his friends and all good men, but he was strict with all wicked men, thieves and evil men, a great controller over everything in his district, and prompt to help in all that needed his presence.

<p n=1.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Paul was a priest-hood&apos;s man <hi>or</hi> gode, and he upheld his moot-men in all righteous cases, so that they always got the better therein.

<p n=1.8><ab type=parNum>8.</ab> Paul had four children, that grew up out of childhood, by Herdis his wife, two sons and two daughters; his sons were named Loft and Cetil, and his daughters Halla and Thora. They were all goodly to look on, and grew up of good parts.

<p n=1.9><ab type=parNum>9.</ab> Bishop Thor-lac, Paul&apos;s mother&apos;s brother, held him in great esteem, and loved him much, and often asked him to his house. But though some other chiefs were adverse <hi>or</hi> refractory to bishop Thor-lac, Paul was the more trusty and fully faithful to him the more others forsook him. And when bishop Thor-lac died Paul showed his loving friendliness to him more than all his noble friends.


<pb id=pb505a n=505><p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Next summer after the death of Saint Thor-lac the bishop, Paul was chosen bishop, but there was a very long debate over the matter; but at last it came to this, that the matter should be put to bishop Brand, chiefly by the counsel of Hall Gizor&apos;s son, and he chose Paul to go out [and be hallowed bishop]. But he [Paul] did not soon consent to undertake the charge, and one after another went to ask him, bishop Brand and also his brothers, and others of his dearest friends, but he refused, and so went home from the Moot.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Then he went to the church-day [Dedication-day] at Ord on Seliamen&apos;s-mass [July 8, 1194] with great concern of mind. But when all had now ceased from asking him, and he saw when he thought over what was to be done that there was none left to contend with him, unless he wished to withstand God&apos;s will,&mdash;and this he surely did not wish to do,&mdash;at this moment the Holy Ghost cast it into his mind to put himself under this burden for the sake of others&apos; needs, and with that he boldly undertook the charge which his mind had so long set him against doing.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And a little after this he went to Scal-holt, and John, his father, and his brothers with him, and at once took over all the stewardship of the bishopstead there. And straightway he asked Gizor Hall&apos;s son to abide there, for he had been there in the days of Saint Thor-lac the bishop, and was the greatest ornament to the see and the greatest furtherance to the estate thereof of all them that were there. Paul let all the managership in Scal-holt go on in the same way as it had done before, but he set priest Thor-kel Hall&apos;s son to take care of the <pb id=pb506a n=506>church, and he was his first chaplain when he came out [to Iceland], but he afterwards became canon of Wer [Thickby].

<p n=2.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Herdis took care of the homestead at Scard, and of all their children, and of all that belonged to them, in goodly and seemly wise as long as he was abroad, and it was said by all, that no children were so well brought up as their children in the whole hundred: and all this kept its shape as long as she was alive, for she was of all women the most scrupulous both for herself and others, as was often proved.


<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Paul went abroad the same summer that he was chosen bishop, and he was at that time in deacon&apos;s orders. He had a fair voyage till he came to Norway, and then he went to the Chipping <hi>or</hi> market-town at Niths-oyce [Nidaros], and was there through the winter until Yule passed ... and of those he met there that man thought he did best who did most to pay him honour and respect, and this the rather the nobler the man was [who entertained him], and in this they did rightly.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Archbishop Eiric was in Denmark when Paul came out to be consecrated, and he was staying there with archbishop Absalom, but king Swerre-Magnus was east in Wick, whence he went to the Uplands. But after Yule Paul and his following went from the north out of the Chipping <hi>or</hi> market-town to see the king, and with him there came many of the king&apos;s men. And the king received him as well as if he had been his son or brother, and gave him as much rank and honour as he himself or his friends could ever have wished for, and the reason of this was both because the king saw better into men than other men could, <pb id=pb507a n=507>and because he had better means to do as he wished, and he put forth all that was of the best to do most honour to both of them.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Bishop Thore ordained Paul priest in Hammer-chipping. It was in the Ember-days in Lent one night after Matthias-mass [Feb. 26], and afterward he went back to the king the same night, and he abode with him till he went to Denmark; and the king provided everything that he seemed to have need of for his journey. Moreover the king got all the bishops that were in the country to give him a letter with their seals. Then he went to Denmark about Lent, and came to Lund on the first day of Pasch [Easter] to see the archbishop, and, as soon as he was come, Absalom asked him to stay with him, with the greatest honour, and waited for him at the high mass when he knew that he was about to come.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> He was there with the archbishops through Easter-week, and was held in the greatest honour by them both; and counsel was taken forthwith for his consecration, for they soon got proof of what a paragon he was, both for learning and wisdom and accomplishments. And he waited for his consecration in the monastery that is called Herads-wade, but he was hallowed earlier than the time they had fixed when they parted, and the chief cause of this was that king Cnut Waldemar&apos;s son sent word that they should further his journey, as it would suit him best and those whom he was to be bishop over. And this went of a piece with his other luck, that such a noble person should honour him so <pb id=pb508a n=508>greatly though he had not seen him, as to give the very counsel as he himself would have wished should be given.

<p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Archbishop Absalom hallowed Paul bishop on the day of bishop John [April 23], eight nights before Philip and James&apos; mass, by the counsel of archbishop Eiric, who had not then himself the sight needful to hallow him. The bishops that were at Paul&apos;s consecration were archbishop Eiric, and Peter bishop of Roes-keld. Bishop Paul gave a gold ring to archbishop Absalom, and another to bishop Eiric, and to all the others that took part at his consecration and advancement to the dignity of bishop some treasure or other. Celestine was pope when bishop Paul was consecrated. Bishop Paul was forty years old when he was consecrated bishop.

<p n=3.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Afterwards he went to Norway, and met king Swerre, east in Wick, and went with him to Beorg-win [Bergen], and was with him until he went to Iceland the same summer, and the king honoured him ever the more in all ways, the longer he was with him and the better he knew him. All men held him in great esteem, as was to be looked for, and his kinsmen were all the most noble men in the whole country.


<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Bishop Paul went out to Iceland the same summer that he had been hallowed bishop, and came to Ey-frith, and there he gave a costly feast to bishop Brand and other of his friends whom he could get there, with wine to drink, and ale, and all the other meat and drink, of the best that could be. And it was then shown forthwith at the first, as was often <pb id=pb509a n=509>proved afterwards, that he was ever best pleased when he was cheering his friends as many as he could gather and his kinsfolk in worshipful entertainment with love and magnificence.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He brought home with him two glass-windows to give to the church at Scal-holt, to his ghostly spouse; and so he showed at once, which afterwards appeared still more, what was in his mind, how much he wished to adorn the church to which he was consecrated more than it ever was before, though even before it was the finest and most precious of all that were in Iceland.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> This was the first honour that bishop Paul paid his see and his church, which no bishop as yet had ever done, to wit, he sung no mass before he came to his see in Scal-holt, but in all lands it is esteemed that it is as good for a man to hear a new-made priest&apos;s first mass as it is to hear an every-day bishop&apos;s mass; but how much better must this have been seeing it was the first mass of a priest and a bishop at once. And many men gathered to Scal-holt at those glad tidings to hear bishop Paul&apos;s first mass. There were many noble men that stood and heard him, John Loftsson his father, Sæ-mund and Orm his brethren, and Gizor Hall&apos;s son, and there was a great gathering there then. The bishop spoke a long and fair discourse, and he promised at once, what was a most welcome thing to most men, that he would ordain all the ordinances which bishop Thor-lac had ordained.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> This also was manifest at once, when he began to go progresses through his diocese, how blithe and cheerful he was to all under him, <pb id=pb510a n=510>and how easily he was satisfied with regard to all that was his due, both the hospitality or other things which were due to his position. And thereby he became so beloved by the whole commonalty, that well-nigh every man held him most dear, both they that were in his diocese and no less they that were of the other diocese. It was also easy to see how rich a man he would become, by reason of his prudence and good management in every thing and way.

<p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Bishop Paul had been one winter in Scal-holt before Herdis, his wife, came thither to take over the management of all within doors, and she was such a prop and stay there, both as regards the bishopstead and himself, as no other among men was, as long as he was [bishop] in the see. So great was her skill in business that before she had been more than a few winters there there was plenty of everything that was needed, and there was no need to go a-begging for anything, though there were one hundred persons on the estate, and [of these] about seventy or eighty servants.


<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Bishop Paul soon saw this when he came to the see of Scal-holt, that it would be needful for him to keep up and strengthen and finish a certain thing which the holy bishop Thor-lac had shown to be his will, and towards which he had begun to buy. And this was to provide for the church-bells which Thor-lac had bought for the bishopstead in Scal-holt, and which were the best in all Iceland. He had also got out from abroad with the bells four beams twenty ells long by measure.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> For this end bishop Paul then got him the man who was the best <pb id=pb511a n=511>carpenter in all Iceland, whose name was Amund Arne&apos;s son, and he had a bell-house <hi>or</hi> steeple made so beautifully wrought, both in its material and in its workmanship, that it carried it over all other wooden buildings in Iceland, no less than the church itself had done before. He had a church made in the upper floor of the steeple, and a staircase to go up thereto, and he hallowed this church to Saint Thor-lac the bishop on the tenth day of Yule, and furnished the church fairly in every way, putting into it everything that was needed therefore. He let priest Atle the scribe [illuminator] paint all the roof inside the steeple and the gable end, and hang it all below with three hangings well and fairly, and over each of the tombs of them that were buried in the steeple he let write who they were that rested there. He laid out no less money in building this steeple, as far as he could bethink himself, than 400 pieces of silver or somewhat more. He bought the bells that were in the steeple, and were the greatest treasures of their size, from a Northern man whose name was Col. He bought moreover other bells for the steeple, two of them being those of the same tone, that are above the church, and he adorned in every way that he could devise, both the church and the steeple, with every kind of furniture, tablets and crosses, and books, and images, and lamps, and glass-windows, and all kinds of bishops&apos; vestments. He also had a noble stone coffin cunningly hewn, wherein he was laid after his death, and he had a <hi>crypt</hi> made in worshipful fashion in the steeple, for those men whom he thought most closely bound to him.


<pb id=pb512a n=512><p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> In the third year of bishop Paul&apos;s bishopric, his father, John Loftsson, died on All-hallow-day [Nov. 1, 1197], the man who was then the noblest chief in all Iceland. He felt it to be a great blow to him&mdash;the loss of the man who was most able to raise and strengthen his dignity, and was the most bound of all men so to do.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But Almighty God, who ever let his happiness and good fortune wax day after day and never grow less, took such care of his renown that no man before in Iceland hath ever received equal honour and dignity from his kinsmen as he got there from his near kinsman bishop Thor-lac the Saint, because it was in his days that his glory and saintliness were shown forth, first in the north-country and afterwards over all Iceland and all other lands that were near. But, though bishop Paul was more glad than any one else of these tidings, he carried himself so carefully in the matter that he would have the vote of all the chiefs and the wisest men before him in dealing with this matter; and there was not wanting a report among some men, that he did not want the matter of the saintliness of the blessed bishop Thor-lac to get abroad. But he acted as he did, because he wished to give God the glory, that he had let that come about in his days the like of which had never happened, and because he wished the matter to be so carried that there might be most hope of God&apos;s approval. He thought it to be a matter of difficulty as it was, to set the matter going with a lofty balance, and that there might be found nothing blameworthy in its treatment, but no one believed earlier <pb id=pb513a n=513>nor forwarded more than he did the glory and saintliness of the blessed bishop Thor-lac, though he walked more warily than other men [with regard to it]. Nevertheless it was the opinion of all the wisest men, according to the message of bishop Brand, that the relics of bishop Thor-lac should be translated this summer according as he had himself foretold in a manifest vision of Thor-ward the priest&apos;s the Yule next before this.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> After the Moot the same summer that this was decided upon, bishop Paul sent word to bishop Brand, and to his brethren Sæ-mund and Orm, and to the sons of Gizor Hall&apos;s son, Thor-wald and Magnus, and to Thor-laf Thorlaksson of Hot-dale the mother&apos;s father of Herdis, to Cetil her son, to Thor-lac Cetil&apos;s son Herdis&apos; brother, to priest God-mund Are&apos;s son, who was later bishop of Holar, and to many others of his dearest friends. For them that came bishop Paul prepared a costly feast, and afterwards there were taken up out of the earth the relics of the blessed bishop Thor-lac, and bestowed withal as worshipfully as beseemed it, according to the foresight and provision of bishop Paul, and straightway there followed mighty tokens, as it is told in his [Saint Thor-lac&apos;s] Life, and the glory was his, but the good-hap was bishop Paul&apos;s.

<p n=6.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> The next summer after [1199] the mass-day of bishop Thor-lac was made law throughout the whole land, and a two days&apos; fast ordained withal. After this men sought thither out of all the country to do reverence to the blessed bishop Thor-lac with vigils and fasts, and prayers and gifts, and thither too sought they that were travellers, many <pb id=pb514a n=514>every season, both aliens and Icelanders, and paid their vows there that they had vowed, and gave into bishop Paul&apos;s hands, and told him every man the cause of his vow, and the token that they received in return, and this was ever glad tidings to him. They all carried away with them true proofs of the saintliness and glory of the blessed bishop Thor-lac and the hospitality and magnificence of bishop Paul.

<p n=6.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> But though the renown of bishop Paul was great as was deserved, before the saintship of bishop Thor-lac was mooted, it made his repute still higher in that he had a mother&apos;s brother of true nobility, and many looked for the old saw to come true, that &lsquo;a man takes after his mother&apos;s brother.&rsquo; And there were many tokens that it would be so, because he did in many things just as the blessed bishop Thor-lac had done. He was careful in his life and an observer of the offices, he mortified himself with fasts and with regard to raiment, he had moreover a touch of all those things which he could find out that the blessed bishop Thor-lac had in his behaviour, lowly and an almsgiver, living plainly and long-suffering, as in both [him and his foregoer] was proved by trials many and great during their bishoprics.

<p n=6.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> When bishop Paul thought that sufficient money had been gathered and brought together, of that which men gave out of their goodwill to the blessed bishop Thor-lac, then he quickly made manifest what he had made ready in his mind to do. He hired that goldsmith, whose name <pb id=pb515a n=515>was Thor-stan, and who was the most skilful worker in metal of all Iceland. And so abundant were the bishop&apos;s supplies that there was no lack of anything that was needful for the work which he wished to have wrought.

<p>He let a shrine be wrought, and furnished therefore abundantly moneys in gold and gem-stones and burnt silver. He laid out no less money upon the shrine and the hire of the smiths, with the contributions of other men, than four hundred pieces of silver. This shrine was so beautifully wrought, that it no less excelled all other shrines that were in Iceland in beauty than it did in size, and it was more than three ells long, and there was no other longer than an ell of all those that were then in Iceland. No wise man who sees this shrine can question how magnificent a man he must have been who could have had this treasure made, or what wealth he must have had to have begun such a work.


<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> In the days of bishop Paul there came out of Green-land bishop John, and he abode the winter through in East-frith, and then came to Scal-holt at the end of Lent to the bishop Paul; and he came thither on Shear-[Thurs]day [April 3, 1203], and both the bishops hallowed much anointing oil <hi>or</hi> crisma, and they held many confidential talks and laid wise plans between them. Bishop Paul received him with the greatest honour, and gave him a worshipful feast while he was there, and led him on his way with great magnificence, both in gifts and other marks of honour. Bishop John taught men how to make wine out of crow-berries, according <pb id=pb516a n=516>as king Swerre had told him. And it happened the next summer [1203] after there were berries almost everywhere in Iceland; and a man, whose name was Eiric, who dwelt a short way from Scal-holt at the homestead that is called Snorre&apos;s-stead, made some wine out therefrom, and it turned out well. But that very summer bishop John went to Norway and thence to Rome, and everywhere he came he spoke highly of the hospitality and dignity of bishop Paul.

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> In the days of bishop Paul, when Gizor Hall&apos;s son held the Law-speakership, there arose very much unrighteous dealing as to the ell, both among aliens and Icelanders, so that men thought it not to be borne any longer. Then bishop Paul gave this counsel in the matter, that men were to have for a measure sticks <hi>or</hi> yards two ells length. Then other chiefs lent their might with the bishop to the forwarding of this measure, Gizor and his sons, Thor-wald and Hall and Magnus, as well as his brothers, Sæ-mund, who was then the most noble man in all Iceland, and Orm, who was both a good lawyer and skilled in most other knowledge, and all the chiefs, and it was then made law as it hath been maintained ever since.

<p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> In the seventh year of the bishopric of bishop Paul, Absalom, archbishop in Denmark, died on Bennet&apos;s-day [March 21, 1201], and in the same year bishop Brand died on Sextus-day [Aug. 6], and he had been bishop eight winters of the fourth ten [38], and was a great paragon. After the death of bishop Brand, the North-countrymen chose for bishop priest God-mund Are&apos;s son, and bishop Paul gave him his writ to archbishop <pb id=pb517a n=517>Eiric, and God-mund was hallowed bishop in Thrond-ham ten nights before bishop John&apos;s-mass [April 13, 1203], and Hacon, son of king Swerre, was then king in Norway. Bishop God-mund came back to Iceland the same summer and came to East-frith, and then bishop Paul and he met, and they paid each other much honour in feasts and gifts. Then bishop God-mund went to Holar, and sat there in his see with the greatest discomforts on many accounts. His means soon became small, but the outgoings were hardly deemed moderate. And all that came in the way with him, held him rather stern and stiff in his commands. But bishop Paul waxed ever in love and friendship with the whole commonalty of the land, as men saw his prudence in everything, and his easiness in what he required and commanded to all that were in obedience to him; and all the people of the land would fain have had such a governor over them if they could have had their choice.

<p n=7.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Paul had the number of the churches taken, that there was need of priests for, in the three Quarters of the country over which he was bishop, and he had the priests numbered, how many there were needed in his diocese. And there were two hundred and twenty churches, ten-told, and there were needed of priests ten less than three hundred, ten-told. And he had them numbered for this reason, that he wished to give priests leave to go abroad if there were enough left behind in his diocese, and he wished also to provide, if need were, that there should be no lack of priests in his diocese as long as he was bishop.

<pb id=pb518a n=518><p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> In the twelfth year of the bishopric of bishop Paul there came to pass these tidings which were of great concern. There died Gizor Hall&apos;s son two nights before Olave&apos;s-mass [July 27, 1206]. Of him spake Sæ-mund Paul&apos;s brother these words, that he was &lsquo;a rook <hi>or</hi> cornerstone of all merriment wherever he was present.&rsquo;

<p n=7.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Then also three nights before Ambrose-day the following winter [Dec. 4, 1206] there came up fire [was an eruption] in Hecla-fell for the third time.


<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Bishop Paul was such a fortunate man, that well-nigh everything went sun-wise [happily] with him in the earlier part of his life; and [this also he had] as may be heard in some degree in the [body <hi>or</hi> hull] of this story, I have told above, and there is nothing therein but what is true, that he became, as it were, the idol <hi>or</hi> teraph of all men. And Almighty God blessed him the more the longer he lived both in wealth and honour.

<p>But if any one should think that, for love&apos;s sake, I have adorned the story of the life of bishop Paul more than there was any ground for, they do not guess right, for this rather sticks in my mind, that I have left out many notable things in the story of his life, by reason of lack of knowledge or by carelessness and laziness in writing, rather than that I have lied a whit in my story.

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> This happy plan moreover bishop Paul took up, when men suffered stress of bad seasons, and lacked crops and fish and most other winter <pb id=pb519a n=519>provision, whereby there came about first a lack of food for beasts and afterwards for men,&mdash;then he took this counsel, by the good-will of Thor-wald Gizor&apos;s son and other wise men of his fellowship, to vow to God and the saints for bettering of the seasons, to sing three <hi lang=la>Pater-nosters</hi> every day to the glory of God and the memory of Saint Thor-lac the bishop, and on his day in the summer to give at the morning-meal the milk of his sheep and a bundle of hay from each cow&apos;s fodder, and a mark <hi>or</hi> half-pound out of each half-hundred weight [to the poor]; and there came never any famine more as long as he lived.


<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> But inasmuch as God will not always try them whom He loveth with indulgence only, but will rather by temptation and trials make His servants perfect, if they stand fast, as there have been many ensamples:&mdash;

<p>2. Now when bishop Paul was shining in such bloom that his worth and wealth were ever increasing, and Herdis was gathering in all kinds of things with her husbandry and prudence, which the estate stood in need of, with all the stewardship that was needful; for she was the most notable housewife in all those matters of business that there was a call for upon the estate at home or at any other of the homesteads that the bishop owned: their children became at once in their young years skilful: Loft in handicraft and learning and wisdom, Cetil in skill and handwriting, Halla in working and book-lore, Thora in obedience and love. Now inasmuch as God speaketh thus in the Gospel, that anything that is said shall be established by two or three witnesses [<xref url="bib:jn 8:17">John viii. 17</xref>], I <pb id=pb520a n=520>will set forth with one the testimony of A-mund the Smith, who was a man both of rule and truth. He made this verse&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>God magnifies Loft with the highest gift, there is no stint therefrom,
    <l>And the King of the Moon increases Cetil&apos;s estate by his power,
    <l>And the Lord of all bestows a most blissful life on the Halla,
    <l>And the dear Prince of the Archangels makes Thora thrive mightily.
</lg>

        <p rend="align(right)">[See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 282.]


<p>So it went with them ever in their life till the day that they were visited by misfortune.


<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> Now when bishop Paul had been at his see twelve winters [1207], it happened that Herdis went from home in the spring after Easter to Scard, to a homestead the bishop had there, and she was going to get servants and busy herself with other matters that were needful there. Two of her children, Cetil and Halla, went with her, but Loft and Thora were at home with the bishop.

<p>But when Herdis was at Scard there came a great flood, and the river Steer-water <hi>or</hi> Theorso could not be ridden. But she wished to get home at the day she had named, because there was much at home unsettled, which it was meant should wait her coming. So she had a boat got and taken to the river, and they went down to the boat&mdash;Herdis, Cetil, and Halla, and John Herdis&apos; brother, and a priest named Beorn chaplain of the bishop that served them, Sig-fus Grimsson the priest, a deacon of Scard named Thor-stan, Gud-run Thor-odd&apos;s daughter and Herdis&apos; sister&apos;s daughter. Cetil and Beorn went across the <pb id=pb521a n=521>river first, their horses and harness, and Herdis&apos; riding horse was lost then. The last time, when they were to cross, there were on board the boat, Sig-fus Grimsson, Thor-stan the deacon, Herdis, and Halla and Gud-run, and the weather was somewhat squally. And when they got into the current, and were a short way from the shore they were about to go over to, they foundered, and the boat sunk under them, and they all went to the bottom, and all came up again, and both mother and daughter were heard to chaunt and commend themselves and their souls to God Almighty&apos;s hand. And there they that were to die, and they that were to live, parted: Sig-fus was driven ashore, but Herdis, Halla, and Gud-run were drowned, and Thor-stan the deacon; but Sig-fus was much spent when he came ashore, but there was no man ashore that gave any help to them.

<p>But Almighty God fulfilled all His promises, He that hath promised that He would &lsquo;give comfort with every grief,&rsquo; and that &lsquo;He would try no one more [heavily] than he could bear&rsquo; [by that which He lays upon him] [<xref url="bib:1cor 10:13">1 Cor. x. 13</xref>]. And God showed this in both ways in the grievous mishap, for comfort came with grief, in that all the bodies of them that were drowned were found the same day, and this comfort was very great to them that survived, and yet it was little likely [that it could have happened], save God of His goodness and grace had granted it, for there was such a great flood, that a few nights later the horse that had drowned there was driven up on the West-men-isles.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But when these tidings came to the ear of bishop Paul suddenly at <pb id=pb522a n=522>the dead of night, then it was manifest to all that God had measured close what he could bear. He could not taste any food, and could get no sleep before the bodies were buried, though he tried to cheer up as much as he could. But yet any one may tell what a trial he had, to have lost so grievously the persons he loved best, and to see sorrow continually in his children and in all those that he had to care for. He did all that had to be done for the dead with composure, both as regards fees to the clerks and also to the poor, for he perceived this, which is true enough, that in such matters &lsquo;a sinking plow [i.e. deep plow] is better than a swaying one.&rsquo;

<p n=10.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> The anniversary of Herdis and them that lost their lives with her is fourteen nights after the Invocation of the Cross in the spring [May 17, 1207]. And it was many men&apos;s duty, both clerk and lay, to remember her [pray for her soul] as warmly and lovingly as their nearest kinswoman, because of her many housewifely charities [on their behalf].

<p n=10.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Paul gave great comfort to Thor-lac Herdis&apos; brother, both in words and in munificent gifts which he gave him, and held him with no less esteem than before he lost her; the bishop cared for Thor-lac no less than for his own children after her death.

<p>Thora, bishop Paul&apos;s daughter, took the management of all indoors after the death of her mother, with the loving supervision of her father, though she was no older than fourteen years of age; and she carried all on so well that they that were best acquainted with her ways of management esteemed them the best.

<pb id=pb523a n=523><p>The bishop so soon got the better of the grief that he had suffered, that many men thought there was little trace of it to be seen in him: and yet every one can clearly understand that it was more his long-suffering and his wish to appear cheerful to the people than because his sorrow ever went out of his heart as long as he lived.


<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> Bishop Paul would seldom, in comparison with the former ways, save it were a high-day, preach a sermon, for he thought that they would care more for it if they could seldom get it; but he had two masses sung well-nigh every holiday, he himself preached a sermon four days every twelve-month, the first day of Yule, and the first Wednesday of the Fast [<hi>Ash-Wednesday</hi>], Shear-[Thurs]day, and the day of the [dedication of the] church, and only on any other day when he thought there was some need [to say somewhat].

<p>And I put this down for this reason, that other most scrupulous and careful men have done likewise, and it is the greatest good for them that shall come afterward, that they may know as many ensamples as possible of such men&apos;s doings, for there is good to be got out of all.

<p>At every place where he took quarters he himself made a discourse, or set another to do so, when he was holding his visitation in any part of his diocese.

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Several men were his chaplains; first the priest Thor-kel Hall&apos;s son, a good clerk and upright man, for some winters, until he entered the <pb id=pb524a n=524>Order of Canons. After that priest Leg served him seven winters; and afterwards a North-countryman called Beorn, a man of small stature but wise and well-learned, and a foster-son of bishop Brand; afterwards he went abroad. After that priest Brand Dale&apos;s son served him, who had before served bishops Brand and God-mund. Priest Cetil Her-mund&apos;s son was also his servant [chaplain] before he died, and he took care of the choir of the cathedral and the clerks there after the loss of bishop Paul. The former bishops let the same chaplains serve them all through, each of them, that they might show the steadfastness and evenness of their temper in this as in much else. But why bishop Paul changed his chaplains was, because he thought it better that many should get rank and honour from him, and each man was in good esteem while he served him whatever might happen afterward.


<p n=12.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> At the time Herdis died, the case of the Northlanders between bishop God-mund and Colban Tumesson began to get troublesome, and as is well known, all the men in this country gat great distress through these troubles. But bishop Paul bore the brunt of these troubles before any one else ..., not before in the Northlanders Quarter. And he was in such troublesome position <hi>or</hi> sore stress in this matter, because the archbishop had sent him his letter with his seal that he should stay and strengthen, as far as his power would go, the side of bishop God-mund, while many dear friends of bishop Paul supported <pb id=pb525a n=525>the side of Colban and kinsmen and relations of his own to whom he wished to show <corr sic=lovingkindness>loving kindness</corr> withal, yet he could do nothing. But it was no easy thing to make these matters right, inasmuch as bishop God-mund did not think himself upheld, unless bishop Paul stood in the forefront with him, and he defied both men and the laws of the land, and interdicted and excommunicated every one that would do anything against his will. But Paul was oftentimes a patient man, even though all was not done as he wished and as he saw it ought to be, and in this way he brought many to good fruit towards himself and God, and to others he gave gentle penances. Nevertheless they could not bear always to be in wrong; but bishop God-mund did not pay any more regard to those men that were in Paul&apos;s diocese, but interdicted them and excommunicated them as soon as they gave any judgment that was not to his mind, even though it were the lawful judgment. But bishop Paul would not let these sentences bite men [deep], but yet would lay upon them some small penance, for the safety sake of those that came under or were inmeshed in God-mund&apos;s cause, for Paul liked rather that those under his charge should undergo some [slight penance] rather than sit in terror as to whether the bishop&apos;s sentence might take effect in them or not.

<p n=12.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> But when the troubles ran so high that there was a battle wherein Colban and many other good men, both clerk and lay, fell [Sept. 9, 1208], and they that survived lost their [friends]. And after that the bishop and his men made an attack upon the survivors and the next-of-kin to <pb id=pb526a n=526>Colban, and drove them away and took to themselves all that they had, and declared them to be under excommunication. But when bishop Paul knew and was aware of these tidings, he prayed his friends not to make an attack upon them at once, and his reason was that he knew [the old saw] that &lsquo;the blood-nights are the hottest,&rsquo; and he hoped that this saw would be proved, and expected that matters would go more calmly and reasonably if they waited longer. And he hoped on the other side that bishop God-mund would see the flaw in his work and how much harm had come of it, and would make good offers of peace and honour to those that had the suits for the slain. But when this [hope] was disappointed, and there came news on the contrary of attacks against them, and robberies and assaults and well-nigh every kind of outrage, then Paul sent his chaplain Beorn to see bishop God-mund, and ask him to make amends and allay these troubles with ..., offering to support him as thoroughly therein as was needed with good-will and his own means, in whatever way he could by money or other outlay, if he would only meet him half-way. It was manifest ... the way bishop Paul had by his words hindered the chiefs from going north, first at harvest-tide while men&apos;s grief was the greatest and least abated the pain of the loss of men ...; and then it was proposed to bishop God-mund that he should grant to his noble and good kinsmen some easy amends for what they had suffered than they had, for he wished to snatch <pb id=pb527a n=527>God-mund and his followers out of instant jeopardy while yet it was possible. But bishop God-mund would not listen to it, and charged him with leaning towards the chiefs in making such proposals.

<p>But it was soon made manifest which of the two had most wisdom and prudence in this, because in the same year the chiefs went to Holar [April 15, 1209], and drove bishop God-mund out of his see, and swept away that crowd of rascalry that was encamped there&mdash;outlaws and robbers and reavers, and slew some, and thereby that gang of malefactors was broken up, and thenceforward men had good luck [and peace].

<p>Bishop Paul, with gentleness and good-will, asked bishop God-mund to come and stay with him, but he would not, and took great care not to meet him because he would not listen to his wholesome counsel.


<p n=13.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> At that time Loft, the son of bishop Paul, went abroad, and went to the homes of men of rank in their lands, to Bearne bishop of the Orkneys, and after to king Inge in Norway, and earl Hacon his brother, and from them he received worshipful gifts and much money. But as the bishop sat in much concern about his son and other news how things were going, God gladdened him so that one summer Loft came back with good renown and rich gifts that he had received, and he was able to say that he had got a good welcome for his father&apos;s sake wherever he had been.

<p n=13.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> In that summer came thither [to Iceland] the treasures which Thore archbishop of Norway had sent to bishop Paul, a gold embroidered <pb id=pb528a n=528>mitre, such as none as good had ever come to Iceland, a costly gold ring, and splendid gloves. But the next summer after, when bishop Paul had sat sixteen winters in the see of Scal-holt, there came out noble treasures which Nicholas, bishop of Oslo, sent to bishop Paul, a great finger-ring of gold that weighed two ounces, and a noble stone in it; and he sent him so much balm, that it looked as if there would never be any difficulty about the supply thereof any more, for there was nothing else so difficult to get among those things which it was necessary to have, and this could have cost no less than many marks of burnt silver.

<p n=13.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> It is also needful to put down, that bishop Paul also sent out many gifts to his friends, both hawks and other treasures. He sent archbishop Thore a bishop&apos;s staff, wrought out of tusk-ivory so skilfully that no man had ever seen one so well carven in Iceland as this which Margaret the Skilful had made, who was then the most skilful carver of all folk in Iceland. These two, both she and her husband Thore who was the steward, were both in Scal-holt when bishop Paul died, and she used to do whatever work the bishop set her to do. Bishop Paul had put in hand and had her begin a <hi>tabula</hi> [or <hi>reredos</hi>] for the altar before he died, and had meant to spend on it much money, both gold and silver, and Margaret carved it most nobly out of tusk-ivory, and this would have been the greatest jewel <hi>or</hi> masterpiece if, according to his plan, both Thor-stan the shrine-maker and Margaret had wrought it out with their craft. But his death was a big black blow, and such things had to be put off for <pb id=pb529a n=529>the sake of many other things that had to be done. Thor-stan was appointed to make the <hi>tabula</hi>.

<p>That same summer, when the bishop was last alive, there came out from Norway timber for a [<hi>turret</hi>] cap, which bishop Paul had had hewn, and at that time he paid for all the commodities that were needed for the bishopstead.

<p n=13.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Now are told those things which fell out well this summer, but I will now put down those things which were held to be very much against the stream. There was that great earthquake the next day after the Selia-men&apos;s-mass [July 8, 1211], whereby many folks lost their life, and there fell down whole houses on many homesteads, and the greatest damage was done. There was also the greatest lack of dry weather, and much damage was done thereby [1211]. The news of Clong Thor-wald&apos;s son&apos;s death were also brought out, who was held to bid most fair to be a great chief if his life lasted.


<p n=14.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> That summer bishop Paul fell into sickness and disease, when he was going through the West-frith-men&apos;s Quarter, and with difficulty he reached Hot-dale. There he lay in bed well-nigh four weeks, afterwards he set out for home with little strength, coming home to Scal-holt three nights before Simon&apos;s-mass [Oct. 25], and at once went to bed. He sung the mass on All-hallow&apos;s-day [Nov. 1], and sung the last mass to the honour of God Almighty and all Saints for their help and mercy to him and all Christian men quick and dead. But before Martin&apos;s-mass he began to suffer with great pains from his illness, and <pb id=pb530a n=530>there followed both sleeplessness and loss of appetite, and then it was thought to be a hopeless case. His sons and brethren and many more, of his friends were already there.

<p n=14.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> After this he sent to fetch Thor-wald and Magnus the sons of Gizor, and they came to Scal-holt, and to them he gave orders about everything according to his will. And he was anointed [received the unction] on the utas of Martin-mass. But before he was anointed with the holy unction, he made a long discourse after the example of Saint Thor-lac the bishop.  He confessed before all the clerks that were there harshly [toward himself] all the things that he thought he had done of bad ensample during his bishopric, and prayed all that they would forgive him that in which he had trespassed against them, and he cheerfully forgave all that in which any had trespassed against him, and commended himself to the mercy of God.

<p n=14.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And after that he was anointed, [and] there was some relief in his sickness, until he changed his chrisom clothes, and two nights afterwards, but then the disease of his sickness began to prevail upon <hi>or</hi> overwhelm him anew, and he lived no longer than two nights more, and then he received the body of the Lord at the point of death, and then fell asleep with God.

<p n=14.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> But a week before the death of bishop Paul the moon shone as it were the blood-of-sacrifice, and it gave no light at midnight in a clear sky, and this struck many men with great awe.

<p n=14.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Paul was hallowed bishop in the days of pope Celestine by archbishop <pb id=pb531a n=531>Absalom, in the days of king Swerre; he was then fifty years old. He governed God&apos;s Christendom [here in Iceland] with great temperance sixteen winters, and died the third day of the week one night before Andrew&apos;s-mass [Nov. 29, 1211], and there was then passed from the birth of God four years of the thirteenth hundred.

<p n=14.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Priest Are the historian, who hath told together many memorable things, saith how heavily our land drooped after the loss of bishop Gizor, whom men esteemed the greatest man that had ever lived in Iceland [see Mantissa, ch. 1]. And here it may be seen how many fearful omens took place before the loss of this our precious chief, bishop Paul.&mdash;The earth shook and shivered for fear, the heavens and the clouds wept, so that great part of the growth of the earth was destroyed, and the heavenly bodies [stars] showed upon them the manifest tokens of death when it was well-nigh come to the last hours of the life of bishop Paul; and the sea also burnt off the land, to which his bishopric reached. It did show as if all the elements showed upon themselves some mark of sorrow for his loss.

<p n=14.6><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> And the last night that bishop Paul was alive, Thor-wald Gizor&apos;s son, the wisest of the chiefs, dreamed that John Loft&apos;s son commended to Peter the apostle the flock which his son, bishop Paul, had charge of; but [as] Jesus Christ commended His flock into the hands of His Father before His Passion, so bishop Paul commended himself and his flock to the care of Almighty God before he was called from us, who was our father and guide.


<pb id=pb532a n=532><p n=15.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>15.</hi> 1.</ab> And now is here to be seen the whole bishopdom of the precious <hi>or</hi> goodly bishop from stem to stern; and we believe that we may not have spent the time thereon [unprofitably; for who of those to whom it was granted] to see the stern, would not be longing to see also the stem [the outset of his bishopric]?

<p n=15.1.1>Moreover this is a comfort for his loving friends that outlive him, that he hath left behind him well-nigh every legacy that can be taken after a goodly and worshipful man&mdash;<hi>to wit</hi>, worthy children, with good substance withal to recompense them that have suffered most by the death of bishop Paul; wealth enough and all kind of episcopal furniture, much finished, but some launched with good substance <hi>or</hi> material <hi>for the finishing thereof</hi>; good counsel in his teaching, which he taught continually, both in words and by the fair example of his life; good promise and pleasant lodging, which he perfectly intended for the most of his nearest kinsmen. And he must have taken counsel to this end, that God would provide for them whom he had not made special provision for.

<p n=15.1.2>And this history of mine a wise man, Amund Arna&apos;s son, bishop Paul&apos;s smith, hath confirmed, and spoken these verses&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Sixteen years the speaker of God&apos;s law [canon law] ruled the bishop&apos;s see.
    <l>Now he is called hence to God: may Paul come into full peace!
    <l>A maker of peace and lover of justice, he ruled his see righteously sixteen winters.
    <l>His work won favour both with God and man.
    <pb id=pb533a n=533><l>Let us all intercede with God for him,
    <l>That he may soon shine, the joyful bishop, in the choir of the patriarchs.
</lg>

<p n=15.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> During the sixteen years when in God&apos;s Christendom [here in Iceland] was adorned with the blossom of the bishopric of bishop Paul, there were many great tidings in the world. There died pope Celestine, archbishop Absalom, king Swerre, Hacon [and] Guth-orm, kings of Norway; Cnut, Saurkwe, kings of the Swedes; Richard, king of the English: bishop Nial, bishop Brand, bishop John: Harold earl in the Orkneys, earl Philip: abbot Einar Mar&apos;s son, abbot Gud-mund Bialve&apos;s son: abbot Haflide Thor-wald&apos;s son, abbot Thor-kell Scum&apos;s son.

<p n=15.2.1>Many other noble men also died while Paul was bishop, both clerks and laymen&mdash;John Loft&apos;s son, Gizor Hall&apos;s son, Sig-mund Orm&apos;s son, Thor-laf Thor-lac&apos;s son, Thor-wald Thor-kel&apos;s son, Calf Snorre&apos;s son, Are Beorn&apos;s son, Aunund Thor-kel&apos;s son, Her-mund Cod-ran&apos;s son, Thord Snorre&apos;s son, Gud-mund A-mund&apos;s son, priest Berse Hall-dor&apos;s son.

<p n=15.2.2>Also there were many other great tidings in his bishopric, loss of ships and the eruption in Mount Hecla, war, rapine, and arson, and the death of men in many dreadful ways.


<p n=15.2.3>[<hi>Epilogue.</hi>]

<p n=15.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Now I have gone through with haste the life of bishop Paul, but lack of skill rather than ill-will has prevented me from making <pb id=pb534a n=534>this History one of so great mark as the matter was fine which the bishop for his part furnished.

<p n=15.3.1>Almighty God gladden his soul in everlasting glory for ever. Amen.


<!-- END OF TRANSLATED TEXT -->

</div2>

<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<div1 id=s3.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 4.</ab> S.JOHN OF HOLAR&apos;S LIFE.</head>


<p>The Life of bishop John of Holar (d. 1121), the gem of these Lives, is akin in some respects to that of his brother saint, Thorlac of Scalholt; but, though contemporary, not by the same author, as a closer examination will convince the reader. It has a different tone in it&mdash;more mellow, more legendary. It has passed through the crucible of oral tradition, and comes out with a certain finer artistic completeness and beauty than the more hard, raw, and exact life of S. Thorlac exhibits. The seventy-seven years which separate the biographer from the hero account for this ripeness of tone, for this Life was certainly written after the saintship of bishop John was declared in 1200, though not long after that event. The author was therefore a contemporary of the Hunger-waker, and indeed may well have drawn the chapter on Gizor from that work: hence this Life would be the younger of the two, though, we hold, only by a few years.

<p>The text rests upon a vellum of note, the great folio AM. 234, the only extant compeer to the Flatey-book in point of size (but not thickness), the biggest in margin of all Icelandic MS., two columns standing out in every page in the midst of a huge spread of white, clean parchment. This unwonted breadth of white margin and cleanliness is accounted for by the fact that the MS., according to the evidence gathered by Arne Magnusson, was preserved in the cathedral library of Scalholt. It once contained a great collection of saints&apos; lives, and was written in the early part of the 14th century. &lsquo;This book,&rsquo; says Arne, &lsquo;has long belonged to the church at Scalholt, and has been bit by bit riven asunder so. I have got many leaves of it out of many places in Iceland in the uttermost corners of the land.&rsquo; And again, &lsquo;Moreover Thormod Torfason [better known to us as Torfæus, b. 1636, d. 1719] told me of this volume that it had formerly (I believe when he was at school [c. 1651], rather than later when he was in Iceland) been about a hand&apos;s breadth thick, and I remember he added that about that time the school-boys, and may be others, had plucked leaves out of it to put outside Latin exercise-books. When I was with Bartholin [c. 1688], some years before his death, he had this volume on loan from Master Thord Thorlac&apos;s <pb id=pb535 n=535><note place=margin>[151: 1.]</note>son [the bishop, editor of Landnama-book, etc.]. I read it through then, and picked out of all the Sagas which stand therein the <hi>vetustiores</hi> and <hi>rariores voculas</hi>.&rsquo; There are still to be seen in the volume marks of Arne&apos;s red pencil under these &lsquo;older and rarer words.&rsquo; Arne made a Latin translation of this biography, which interested him, probably when he was with Bartholin. The text is good, and there are no leaves lost, luckily, in this part of the volume. It has been photographed in reduced size by the care of Dr. Unger of Christiania, and a copy of this facsimile is in the Bodleian by his gift.

<p>AM. 235, a late 14th-century MS., c. 1380, is used as an additional help. It is a great collection of saints&apos; lives also, and Arne says of it, &lsquo;The book is in small folio, without binding, has formerly been the property of Scalholt church, <hi lang=la>ut puto</hi>.&rsquo; It is covered with thick grey unsized paper to protect it.

<p>The text B (Cod. Holm. 5, fol., see pp. 422&ndash;23, and Introd. to § 6) has rendered help in a few instances. Of S. John&apos;s Saga only the beginning is left (see p. 548). By C, a paper copy of small value (AM. 392) is denoted.

<p>The editio princeps is that by the editor, Biskopa Sogor, vol. i. The fasciculus containing it came out in 1856.

<p>The Life of John, like that of Thorlac, is followed by a <hi>Miracle Book</hi> of early date and various authorship and authenticity. This we have not printed here, as it hardly enters into the plan of our work; it is of the ordinary mediæval type, and adds neither to our knowledge of the bishop or to the state of feeling concerning him which is already well shown in his life. It was printed in full in the Biskopa Sogor, vol. i. An interpolation, as we take it (between chs. <hi rend=bold>12</hi> and <hi rend=bold>13</hi>), of a few miracles, headed by a brief preface taken, it seems, from Thorlac&apos;s Saga, <hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 7, we have weeded out.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=holar lang=is rend="align-with(en.holar)">


<p n=1.1><anchor id=a535.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Þar hefjom ver s&aolig;go eða frá-s&aolig;gn frá enom helga <anchor id=a535.2>Ioane byscope: at í þann tíma es réð Norege Haraldr <anchor id=a535.3>Sigurðar son, en liðner vóro frá falle Óláfs konungs ens Helga <anchor id=a535.4>tveir<note place=apparatus id=an535.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>tveir v. ok t.]</ab> ij and xx, Cd.</note> vetr ok tottogo, þá vas enn helge Ioan byscop f&oeacute;ddr á b&oeacute; <anchor id=a535.5>þeim í Fliótz-hlíð es á Breiða-bólstað heiter. Faðer hans hét<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a535.6>Ogmundr: faðer Ogmundar<note place=apparatus id=an535.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Ogmundr]</ab> en Þórgerðr móðer, add. Cd.</note> hét Þórkell ok vas son Ásgeirs Cneifar. <anchor id=a536.1><pb id=pb536 n=536><note place=margin>[151: 1.]</note>Móðer Ioans byscops hét Þórgerðr; hon vas Egils dótter, Hallz <anchor id=a536.2>sonar af Síðo, þess mannz es fyrstom varð auðet af &aolig;llom h&aolig;fðingjom <anchor id=a536.3>í Austfirðinga fiórðunge at taka skírn ok rétta trú: móðer <anchor id=a536.4>Þórgerðar hét Þórlaug, dótter Þórvallz or Áse.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a536.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Enn helge Ioan byscop óx upp heima með feðr sínom á Breiða-bólstað<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a536.6>þar til es hann vas fiogorra vetra gamall; þá urðo mikel <anchor id=a536.7>tíðende, ok þau es &aolig;llo þesso lannz-folke vas mikell fagnaðr í: <anchor id=a536.8>þá vas vígðr til byscops Ísleifr, son Giz&oelig;rar ens Hvíta, ok dóttor-son <anchor id=a536.9>Þóroddz Goða, at b&oeacute;n allz landz-lýðs. Hann vas vígðr til <anchor id=a536.10>byscops af Adalberto erki-byscope í Brimom af Saxlande, á d&aolig;gom<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a536.11>Leonis ens niunda páva með því nafne. Ísleifr vas lærðr á Saxlande <anchor id=a536.12>í borg þeirre es Herfurða heiter. Hann vas fyrst vígðr hingat til <anchor id=a536.13>lannz þeirra byscopa es her hafa at stóle seteð. Marger byscopar <anchor id=a536.14>h&aolig;fðo áðr komet til þessa lannz þeir es ecke h&aolig;fðo hegat til lannz <anchor id=a536.15>vígðer veret, vóro sumer her miok marga vetr en sumer skamma<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a536.16>stund. Ísleifr vas í Norege enn næsta vetr efter es hann vas vígðr <anchor id=a536.17>til byscops, ok fór síðan til Islannz, ok kom út á næsta sumre efter<note place=apparatus id=an536.1><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>efter]</ab> fyrer, B.</note> <anchor id=a536.18>ó-aldar-vetr enn mikla, ok hafðe stól sínn ok heimile á f&aolig;ðor-leifð <anchor id=a536.19>sínne sialfs í Scála-holte.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a536.20><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Snemmendiss var fyrer spáð af vitrom m&aolig;nnom hví-líkr þesse<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a536.21>maðr m&oelig;nde verða, enn helge Ioan byscop; þvi at hvar sem hann <anchor id=a536.22>kom fannzc m&aolig;nnom miket um hann, þeim es hugleiddo hví-líkt <anchor id=a536.23>bragð yfer hónom vas.

<pb id=pb537 n=537><note place=margin>[152: 2.]</note>

<p n=1.4><anchor id=a537.1><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Goðine hét maðr, ok vas kallaðr Goðine enn Góðe; ok þat <anchor id=a537.2>hyggja menn, at hann hafe svá veret: hann sá enn helga Ioan, þá <anchor id=a537.3>es hann vas barn at aldre, ok r&oeacute;dde um hann þessom orðom: <anchor id=a537.4>&lsquo;Siá maðr es fríðr, ok hefer yfer ser miket heilagleiks bragð.&rsquo; <anchor id=a537.5>Nú kom þar at því sem mælt es, at &lsquo;Spá es þat es spaker mæla<note place=apparatus id=an537.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> Spá er spaks geta, C.</note>.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>



<p n=2.1><anchor id=a537.6><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Þá es Ioan vas barn at aldre, þá breytto þau faðer hans <anchor id=a537.7>ok móðer ráðe síno, ok fóro útan. Þau kómo til <anchor id=a537.8>Danmerkr, ok fóro til Sveins konungs, ok tók konungrenn við <anchor id=a537.9>þeim virðolega; ok vas Þórgerðe skipat at sitja hiá sialfre dróttningonne, <anchor id=a537.10>Ástríðe, móðor Sveins konungs. Þórgerðr hafðe son<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a537.11>sínn, enn helga Ioan, under borðe með ser. Ok es margs-konar <anchor id=a537.12>kráser dýrlegar, með góðom dryck, kómo á borð konungsens, <anchor id=a537.13>þá varð sveinenom Ioane þat fyrer, sem iamnan es barnanna h&aoacute;ttr, <anchor id=a537.14>at hann rétte hendr til þeirra hluta es hann fýste at hafa; en móðer <anchor id=a537.15>hans vilde þat kviðja hónom, ok drap á hendrnar hónom. Ok es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a537.16>dróttningen Ástríðr sá þat, þá mælte hon við Þórgerðe: &lsquo;Eige svá! <anchor id=a537.17>eige svá! Þórgerðr mín: lióstú eige á hendr þessar, þvi at þetta <anchor id=a537.18>ero byscops hendr.&rsquo; Nú má af slíkom at-burðom marka þat sem <anchor id=a537.19>fyrr kómom ver orðe á, hverso vitrom m&aolig;nnom fannzc miket um; <anchor id=a537.20>ok þeir s&aoacute; ok fyrer þá hlute es síðan kómo framm efter goðlegre<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a537.21>fyrer-ætlon um enn helga Ioan byscop.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a537.22><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þat es ok skylt at tiá, es enn helge Óláfr konungr mælte við <anchor id=a537.23>Þórgerðe, móðor ens helga Ioans byscops&mdash;hon vas þá átta<note place=apparatus id=an537.2><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>átta]</ab> tolf, B.</note> vetra <anchor id=a538.1><pb id=pb538 n=538><note place=margin>[153 : 2.]</note>g&aolig;mol, es hon fór til Noregs með feðr sínom ok m&oeacute;ðr. Egill fór <anchor id=a538.2>til hirðar ens helga Óláfs konungs, ok vas þar vel virðr sem aller <anchor id=a538.3>aðrer Íslenzker<note place=apparatus id=an538.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Íslenzker]</ab> B; virðoleger, Cd.</note> menn þeir sem héðan kómo at. En es at Iólom <anchor id=a538.4>dró, þá ú-gladdesc Egill. Konungrenn fann þat, ok spurðe hvat <anchor id=a538.5>til hélde. Egill kvað þat ecke vesa. En es konungr leitaðe efter,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a538.6>þá seger Egill hónom&mdash;ef hann skylde n&oelig;ckot til finna&mdash;at hónom <anchor id=a538.7>þótte þat hellzt at, ef Þórlaug kona hans skylde eige vesa sett iam-virðolega <anchor id=a538.8>sem hann at þeirra hótíð enne dýrlego, es þá fór í h&aolig;nd. <anchor id=a538.9>Konungrenn kvezc mundo ráða b&oeacute;tr á því, ok bauð henne til sín <anchor id=a538.10>at Iólonom, ok b&aoacute;ðom þeim m&oeacute;ðgom. Ok Ióla-kveldet, es þær<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a538.11>vóro í g&aolig;ngo með Ástríðe dróttningo efter konungs h&aolig;ll, ok vas <anchor id=a538.12>þeim ok í sæte skipat hiá dróttningonne, þá þecker konungrenn <anchor id=a538.13>meyna, ok mæler síðan við Egil f&aolig;ðor hennar: &lsquo;Þesse dótter þín <anchor id=a538.14>lízc mer væn mær, ok með góðo yfer-bragðe, ok þat kann-ek <anchor id=a538.15>at segja þer, at hon verðr gæfo-maðr mikell, ok sá mon g&aolig;fgaztr<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a538.16>ætt-boge á Íslande es frá henne man koma.&rsquo; Nú hefer þat fagrlega <anchor id=a538.17>efter genget, sem v&aoacute;n vas at, es þesse enn helge maðr mælte, ok <anchor id=a538.18>birtezc yfer þessom helga manne Ioane byscope, syne hennar: þvi <anchor id=a538.19>at sá es sannlega g&aolig;fogr, es hann vas prýddr með m&aolig;rgom mann-kostom, <anchor id=a538.20>ok veg-samaðr með byscoplegre tign meðan hann lifðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a538.21>þessa heims; en nú skínn hann f&aolig;grom iartegnom ok verðr at <anchor id=a538.22>mikelle hi&aolig;lp &aolig;llom þeim es hann s&oeacute;kja at árnaðar-orðe við Al&shy;máttkan <anchor id=a538.23>Goð.



<pb id=pb539 n=539><note place=margin>[153: 3.]</note>

<p n=3.1><anchor id=a539.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Þá es faðer Ioans ok móðer h&aolig;fðo útan veret slíka <anchor id=a539.2>stund sem þeim þótte at ráðe, þá fóro þau út aftr til <anchor id=a539.3>Íslannz ok settozc í bú sítt á Breiða-bólstað. En es enn helge <anchor id=a539.4>Ioan vas af liðenn enne mesto bernsko, þá feck faðer hans hann <anchor id=a539.5>til læringar Ísleife byscope; óx hann upp hónom under h&aolig;ndom,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a539.6>ok þroskaðezc brátt í helgo náme ok góðom siðom; þvi at hann <anchor id=a539.7>vas vel til náms komenn um hvárt-tveggja með Ísleife byscope.


<p n=3.2 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a539.8>2. Marger hofðingjar ok virðoleger menn aðrer seldo sono sínar til fóstrs ok til <anchor id=a539.9>læringar Ísleife byscope, ok léto vígja til presta: þeir urðo síðan marger hofuð-kennimenn; <anchor id=a539.10>en tveir vóro byscopar af þeim: enn helge Ioan Norðlendinga byscop,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a539.11>es nú segjom vér í frá, ok annar Kolr<note place=apparatus id=an539.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> B; Kollr, A.</note> Víkverja-byscop.

<p n=3.3 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a539.12>3. Ísleifr byscop átte þriá sono, ok urðo aller hofðingjar mikler: Giz&oelig;rr byscop <anchor id=a539.13>ok Teitr, ok Þórvaldr. Giz&oelig;rr vas lærðr í Herfurðo á Saxlande; Teit f&oeacute;dde Hallr <anchor id=a539.14>í Haukadal<hi>e</hi>.


<p><anchor id=a539.15>Teitr son Ísleifs byscops, f&oeacute;dde ok lærðe marga kenne-menn;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a539.16>ok vóro tveir byscopar af hans lære-sveinom, Þorlákr byscop enn <anchor id=a539.17>fyrre, ok Bi&aolig;rn byscop.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a539.18><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Ísleifr byscop sá brátt, hverso vel Ioan fóstre hans f&oeacute;rðe ser í <anchor id=a539.19>nyt nám sítt, ok þá aðra góða hlute, es hann kennde hónom í sínom <anchor id=a539.20>f&aolig;grom d&oeacute;mom ok góðom siðom, þá tók hann at elska hann miok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a539.21>ok virða mikels í m&aolig;rgom hlutom; ok þar g&oelig;rðo þegar aðrer <anchor id=a539.22>efter.

<p n=3.5><anchor id=a539.23><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Enn helge Ioan vas mikell maðr vexte, manna vænstr ok lið-mannlegaztr, <anchor id=a539.24>eygðr manna bazt; bleikr á hár<note place=apparatus id=an539.2><ab type=lineNumRef>24.</ab> silki-bleikr á hárs-lit, C.</note>, ok sterkr at afle, ok <anchor id=a539.25>enn þeckilegste í &aolig;llo yfer-bragðe: ok svá þeckr sem hann vas &aolig;llom<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a539.26>m&aolig;nnom af síno yfer-bragðe, þá vas hverge minna um þat vert, hverso <anchor id=a539.27>hann vas linr ok léttr við alla alþýðo í mále; ok svá feck hann til gætt <anchor id=a540.1><pb id=pb540 n=540><note place=margin>[154: 3.]</note>með síno góðo um-stille, at hann varð bæðe kærr Goðe ok góðom <anchor id=a540.2>m&aolig;nnom.

<p n=3.6><anchor id=a540.3><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Nú verðr ok skyldogt at segja n&oelig;ckot frá því, hverso enom <anchor id=a540.4>helga Ioans hafe virzc Ísleifr byscop fóstre hans: þvi at svá segja <anchor id=a540.5>hyggner menn ok fróðer, at þat varð Ioane byscope á munne<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a540.6>iamnan, þá es hann vas staddr hiá því es menn r&oeacute;ddo um sín á <anchor id=a540.7>miðlom um þá menn es bazt þótto at ser vesa. &lsquo;Ísleifr byscop, <anchor id=a540.8>fóstre mínn,&rsquo; kvað hann, &lsquo;allra manna vænstr; allra manna <anchor id=a540.9>sniallaztr; allra manna baztr.&rsquo; Þá sv&aolig;roðo þeir byscope, es áðr <anchor id=a540.10>h&aolig;fðo við talasc: &lsquo;Hverr gat nú, herra, Ísleifs byscops?&rsquo; Enn<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a540.11>helge Ioan byscop svaraðe: &lsquo;Hans skal ok ofallt geta, es ek heyre <anchor id=a540.12>góðs mannz geteð.&rsquo; Nú vas þetta fagr vitnis-burðr Ísleife byscope, <anchor id=a540.13>es heilagr maðr skylde svá r&oeacute;ða um hann; en virðing mikel Ioane <anchor id=a540.14>byscope, es slíkr maðr skylde hafa fóstraðan hann.

<p n=3.7><anchor id=a540.15><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Sá hlutr es ok einkom sagðr, at enn Helge Ioan hafe haft<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a540.16>um aðra menn framm, at hann hafe veret raddaðr hverjom manne <anchor id=a540.17>betr; ok þar man<hi>o</hi> enn verða nockor merke til þess s&aolig;gð síðan í <anchor id=a540.18>frá-s&aolig;gnenne, at vitrom m&aolig;nnom hafe svá þótt.



<p n=4.1><anchor id=a540.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Enn helge Ioan fýstezc enn at fara útan; ok vas enn <anchor id=a540.20>helge Ioan þá diacn at vígslo, ok v&aoacute;no<note place=apparatus id=an540.1><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> vonum, Cd.</note> nær roskenn<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a540.21>at aldre, ok girntesc at siá góðra manna siðo, ok nám sítt at auka, <anchor id=a540.22>si&aolig;lfom ser til nytseme ok m&aolig;rgom &aolig;ðrom, sem síðan reyndesc: <anchor id=a540.23>þá fór hann fyrst til Noregs, þaðan til Danmerkr; ok létter hann <anchor id=a541.1><pb id=pb541 n=541><note place=margin>[155: 4.]</note>eige fyrr þesse ferð an hann geck suðr, ok s&oeacute;ker heim enn helga <anchor id=a541.2>Pétr Postola; ok síðan hverfr hann aftr þaðan, ok k&oelig;mr<note place=apparatus id=an541.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>k&oelig;mr]</ab> add. Cd.</note> í Danm&aolig;rk <anchor id=a541.3><hi>in Passione Domini;</hi> ok vas enn Sveinn konungr á lífe, ok <anchor id=a541.4>s&oeacute;ker hann á hans fund.

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a541.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ok es hann k&oelig;mr í þann stað es konungrenn vas fyrer, þá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a541.6>vas þat þar tíðenda, at konungr vas at messo. En prestr sá es <anchor id=a541.7>syngja skylde messona, hóf upp at lesa <hi>passio</hi> í því es enn helge <anchor id=a541.8>Ioan kom í kirkjona; en hónom geck lestrenn seint ok treglega, <anchor id=a541.9>en m&aolig;nnom þótte þungt ok h&aolig;fogt at hlýða þeim es hiá stóðo. <anchor id=a541.10>En es enn helge Ioan fann þat, at prestrenn vas næsta g&oelig;rr at<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a541.11>fyrer-sión af m&aolig;nnom, þá leggr enn helge Ioan stolo yfer herðar <anchor id=a541.12>ser, ok gengr at prestenom, ok tók bókena or hende hónom með <anchor id=a541.13>líti-læte, ok las passiona svá sk&aolig;rolega ok skynsamlega es aller <anchor id=a541.14>undroðosc þeir es við vóro stadder. Ok es loket vas tíðonom, þá <anchor id=a541.15>sender konungr efter hónom, ok býðr hónom til sín, ok bað hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a541.16>lenge með ser vesa; ok lagðe á hann svá mikla virðing at hann <anchor id=a541.17>sette hann et næsta ser si&aolig;lfom, ok þótte miket under at hann <anchor id=a541.18>dvelðezc með hónom lengr an skemr; ok dvalðezc hann með <anchor id=a541.19>hónom um stundar saker.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a541.20><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Á þesse stundo, meðan enn helge Ioan vas með Sveine<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a541.21>konunge, þá vas hann veg-samaðr af Goðe með ágætlegom fyrer-burðom; <anchor id=a541.22>ok um dag es hann kom under konungs borð, þá seger <anchor id=a541.23>hann sialfr konungenom, hvat fyrer hann hafðe boret. &lsquo;Svá þótte <anchor id=a541.24>mer í nótt sem ek væra staddr í n&oelig;ckorre h&aolig;fot-kirkjo forkunnar <anchor id=a542.1><pb id=pb542 n=542><note place=margin>[156: 5.]</note>virðolegre; ok í córenom kirkjonnar, ok svá sem í byscops rúme, <anchor id=a542.2>sá-ek sitja Dróttenn várn Iesum Christum; ok á fót-skemle<note place=apparatus id=an542.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>-skemle]</ab> 225; -skefle, Cd.</note> fyrer <anchor id=a542.3>fótom hónom sá-ek hvar sat enn helge Dávíð konungr, ok sló <anchor id=a542.4>h&aolig;rpo sína með ágetlegre iðrótt ok fagr-legre hlióðon; ok þat <anchor id=a542.5>þycke mer líkara, herra, at efter mone dvalzc hafa í minne míno<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a542.6>af þeim enom fagrlegom hlióðom es hann sló. Nú láttú, herra, <anchor id=a542.7>f&oeacute;ra h&aolig;rpo; ok, at þer hiá vesanda, mon-ek reyna ef ek mega <anchor id=a542.8>muna n&oelig;ckot af því es hann sló.&rsquo; Þá bauð konungr, at taka skylde <anchor id=a542.9>h&aolig;rpo ok fá Ioane; ok tók hann við h&aolig;rpunne ok stilte<note place=apparatus id=an542.2><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> stilte strengena til slagar, C.</note>, ok sló með <anchor id=a542.10>svá mikelle k&oeacute;nsko at konungrenn sialfr ok aller þeir es við vóro<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a542.11>stadder, þá h&aolig;fðo á mále hverso vel sleget vas. Ollom þótte mikels <anchor id=a542.12>um vert þenna at-burð þeim es frá vas sagt, ok lofoðo aller Almátkan <anchor id=a542.13>Goð, þann es ser lætr sóma at birta dýrð heilagra manna sínna.

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a542.14><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Eige h&oeacute;fer annat an geta þess við hverso miket lið Íslenzkom <anchor id=a542.15>m&aolig;nnom varð, iam-vel útan-lendes sem her, at enom helga Ioane<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a542.16>byscope. Teljom ver þann hlut fyrstan til þess, at hann spanðe <anchor id=a542.17>út hingat með ser Sæmund Sigfús son, þann mann es einn hverr <anchor id=a542.18>hefer enn veret mestr nytja-maðr Goðs Cristne á þesso lande; ok <anchor id=a542.19>hafðe veret lenge útan svá at ecki spurðezc til hans. En enn helge <anchor id=a542.20>Ioan feck hann upp spurðan ok hafðe hann sunnan með ser; ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a542.21>fóro þeir báðer saman sunnan út hegat til frænda sínna ok fóstr-iarðar.

<p n=4.5><anchor id=a542.22><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þá es enn helge Ioan vas útan þesso sinne, réð fyrer Norege <anchor id=a542.23>Magnús konungr Óláfs son, Harallz sonar, Sigurðar sonar: ok es <anchor id=a543.1><pb id=pb543 n=543><note place=margin>[156: 5.]</note>enn helge Ioan kom norðr í Þróndheim, þá vas konungrenn þar. <anchor id=a543.2>Í þenna tíma vóro í Norege marger Íslenzker menn. Þá vas þar <anchor id=a543.3>Teitr, son Giz&oelig;rar byscops. Ok þá urðo þar þau tíðende, at <anchor id=a543.4>Íslenzkr maðr, sá es Gísl hét, vá víg; ok vas sá maðr es vegenn <anchor id=a543.5>vas hirðmaðr Magnús konungs. En Gísl rak þat til þessa snar-ræðes,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a543.6>at hann átte at hefna f&aolig;ðor síns. En þesse maðr hét Giaf&shy;valldr <anchor id=a543.7>es Gísl vá; hann hafðe veret at víge Illoga f&aolig;ðor hans. Ok <anchor id=a543.8>bráðlega efter víget þá vas Gísl tekenn, ok fi&aolig;traðr af m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a543.9>konungsens. En es þeir spurðo þat ener Íslenzko menn, þá ganga <anchor id=a543.10>þeir þegar þangat aller saman til stofo þeirrar es Gísl vas inne;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a543.11>ok vas Teitr fyrer liðeno, ok h&oelig;ggr hann af hónom fi&aolig;torenn, <anchor id=a543.12>ok leiðer hann á braut með ser. Ok efter þesse tíðende lætr <anchor id=a543.13>konongr þings kveðja, ok vas ákafa-reiðr, ok horfðe til ens mesta <anchor id=a543.14>váða um málet. Á þesso þinge vas &aolig;llom Íslenzkom m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a543.15>bannat at tala sín m&aoacute;l, nema enom helga Ioane, hónom vas leyft<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a543.16>at tala af konungenom; ok talaðe um málet langt &oelig;rende ok for&shy;kunnar-sniallt; <anchor id=a543.17>ok þat kom til svá mikellar nytsemðar, at reiðe <anchor id=a543.18>konungsens mýkðesc, en þeir menn n&aoacute;ðo griðom ok s&aoacute;ttom es <anchor id=a543.19>áðr vóro nálega til bana ráðner.



<p n=5.1><anchor id=a543.20><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Efter þetta fóro þeir út hi<hi>n</hi>gat til Íslannz, Ioan ok<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a543.21>Sæmundr, ok settozc í bú hvárr á sína f&aolig;ðor-leifð, <anchor id=a543.22>Ioan á Breiða-bólstað, en Sæmundr í Odda, ok bioggo þar báðer <anchor id=a543.23>miok lenge; ok vas þeirra í miðle bróðorleg &aoacute;st ok heilakt samþycke; <anchor id=a543.24>enda vas þeim um marga hlute góða <hi>g</hi>líkt faret. Þeir vóro <anchor id=a543.25>ok nær iam-gamler menn at vetra tale, at því es ver ætlom; ok<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a544.1><pb id=pb544 n=544><note place=margin>[157, 158: 6.]</note>vas Ioan tveim vetrom ellre. Þeir prýddo báðer miok heilagar <anchor id=a544.2>kirkjor, þær es þeir h&aolig;fðo at varð-veita, í m&aolig;rgom hlutom, ok <anchor id=a544.3>þiónoðo þeim lítilátlega í sínom prestzskap, ok &oeacute;xto miket rétt <anchor id=a544.4>þeirra í kennemanna vistom, þeirra es þióna skyldo at hvárre <anchor id=a544.5>kirkjonne fleire an áðr h&aolig;fðo veret. Þeir m&aoacute;tto ok kallazc at rétto<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a544.6>stolpar Cristnennar, þvi at þeir studdo hána fagrlega í sínom <anchor id=a544.7>kenningom helgom, ok m&aolig;rgom &aolig;ðrom farsælegom hlutom, þeim <anchor id=a544.8>es þeir miðlaðo af ser &aolig;llom þeim m&aolig;nnom es þar vóro í n&aoacute;nd, <anchor id=a544.9>eða þeirra heilræðe vildo þeckjazc<note place=apparatus id=an544.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> þickjaz, Cd.</note> eða þýðazc.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a544.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Enn heilage Ioan byscop kvángaðezc, ok átte tvær konor;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a544.11>ok lifðe en fyrre skamma stund, en við hváregre átte hann b&aolig;rn <anchor id=a544.12>þau es or barn&oeacute;sko hafe komesc, eða ver hafem s&aolig;gor frá <anchor id=a544.13>heyrðar.


<p n=6.1 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a544.14><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.   Þa es Ísleifr byscop hafðe seteð at stóle í Scála-holte fióra vetr ok tottogo, <anchor id=a544.15>þá tók hann sótt á Alþinge, ok andaðesc heima í Scála-holte á Dróttens<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a544.16>dege, iii <hi>nonas Julii</hi>, átta tigom vetra efter fall Óláfs Tryggva sonar. Þá vas liðet <anchor id=a544.17>frá burð Cristz <hi rend=sc>M.</hi> vetr lxx<note place=apparatus id=an544.2><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lxx]</ab> B, AM. 219; Cd. Holm. 5. om. &lsquo;lxx;&rsquo; A (234) reduces it to the ordinary chronology, &lsquo;þúsund ára ok átta tiger.&rsquo;</note> ok þrír vetr; efter þat vas vígðr til byscops Giz&oelig;rr son <anchor id=a544.18>Ísleifs byscops at b&oeacute;n allra lannz-manna, þá es hann vas fer-t&oelig;gr at aldre. En þat <anchor id=a544.19>vas á dogom Gregorii páva ens siaunda með því nafne, ok á dogom Óláfs konungs <anchor id=a544.20>Harallz sonar, ij vetrom efter andlát Ísleifs byscops. Giz&oelig;rr fór suðr til Róms,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a544.21>ok beidde þar vígslo, fyrer þvi at Lemmarus erki-byscop vas mis-sáttr við páva, ok <anchor id=a544.22>mátte hann fyrer því eige vígslo gefa. Þá sende Gregorius páve Giz&oelig;r til erki-byscops <anchor id=a544.23>þess, es vas á Saxlande í Magadaborg es Hardevigus hét: hann vígðe Giz&oelig;r <anchor id=a544.24>til byscops at boðorðe páva. Þá tvá vetr es í miðle vóro andlátz Ísleifs byscops ok <anchor id=a544.25>út-kvámo Giz&oelig;rar byscops, vas hann annan her í lande; en annan, enn næsta efter<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a544.26>es hann vas vígðr, vas hann í Danmork suman, en suman á Gautlande; ok kom út <anchor id=a544.27>um sumaret hegat til lannz. Þá hafðe Márkus Skeggja son Logsogo. Giz&oelig;rr <anchor id=a544.28>byscop hefer veret mestr hofðinge ok al-gofgastr maðr á ollo Íslande, at því es <anchor id=a544.29>sagðe Are prestr Þórgilsson, at alðýðo virðing hafe á fallet.

<p n=6.2 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a544.30>2. Af ást-sælð hans ok fortolom Sæmundar prestz, ok með um-ráðom Márkus<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a544.31>Logsogo-mannz, vas þat í log teket, at aller menn á Íslande skyldo telja fé sítt allt <anchor id=a544.32>með svar-dogom, hvárt sem være í londom eða lausom aurom, ok gialda tiund af, <anchor id=a544.33>at þeim hætte sem síðan hefer haldezc. Giz&oelig;rr byscop let log leggja á þat, at stóll <anchor id=a544.34>byscops þess es á Íslande være, skylde vesa í Scála-holte; en áðr vas hverge. Hann <anchor id=a544.35>lagðe til stólsens Scála-holtz-land, ok morg onnor auðræðe í londom ok lausom<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a544.36>aurom.


<pb id=pb545 n=545><note place=margin>[159: 7.]</note>

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a545.1><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þá es Almáttegr Goð vilde hefja upp sínn þiónosto-mann, enn <anchor id=a545.2>helga Ioan, á hærra pall kennemannlegrar tignar, an áðr vas hann, þá <anchor id=a545.3>b&aoacute;ðo Norðlendingar Giz&oelig;r byscop, at hann m&oelig;nde vilja setja <anchor id=a545.4>byscops-stól í Norðlendinga fiórðunge, fyrer þvi at þeir þóttosc fiar-læger, <anchor id=a545.5>en fiórðungrenn sá fiolmennaztr ok mestr, ok þyrfte þar fyrer<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a545.6>því mest byscoplegrar yfer-ferðar; en hennar vas þar áðr sialdnazt <anchor id=a545.7>kostr. Giz&oelig;rr byscop bar þetta mál fyrer ena hyggnozto menn; ok <anchor id=a545.8>sýndesc þeim svá &aolig;llom saman, sem þat m&oelig;nde ráð at láta efter þeim <anchor id=a545.9>þessa b&oeacute;n; mest fyrer þá s&aolig;k, at þat sýndesc vesa miket upp-hald <anchor id=a545.10>Goðs Cristne, ok <hi>g</hi>líklegt at landet m&oelig;nde verða skemrom byscops-laust<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a545.11>ef tveir være byscoparner. Þat vas nú síðan ráðs teket, at <anchor id=a545.12>Giz&oelig;rr byscop gaf meirr an fiórðungenn byscopsdóms síns til <anchor id=a545.13>þess at byscop-stóll skylde vesa í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge, svá sem <anchor id=a545.14>Norðlendingar b&aoacute;ðo hann til. En til þess vanda ok virðingar ok <anchor id=a545.15>byscopsdóms yfer Norðlendinga-fiórðunge ok Norðlendingom, þá<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a545.16>kaus Giz&oelig;rr byscop Ioan prest Ogmundar son, með sam-þycke <anchor id=a545.17>allra lærðra manna ok ú-lærðra í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge. Ok <anchor id=a545.18>þótt enn helge Ioan telðesc í fyrstonne miok undan þessom vanda, <anchor id=a545.19>fyr lítilætis saker, þá lét hann þó at b&oeacute;n Giz&oelig;rar byscops, ok iát<hi>t</hi>asc <anchor id=a545.20>under útan-ferð, ok byscops-vígslo at taka, ef Goð vill at þess auðne.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>



<p n=7.1><anchor id=a545.21><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Nú vóro oft síðan stefnor at áttar um þetta mál; ok <anchor id=a545.22>rézc þat af, at stóll Norðlendinga-byscops m&oelig;nde <anchor id=a545.23>vesa settr norðr í Hialta-dale á b&oeacute; þeim es at Hólom heiter, Þar <anchor id=a546.1><pb id=pb546 n=546><note place=margin>[159: 8.]</note>bió virðolegr prestr sá es<note place=apparatus id=an546.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sá es]</ab> Hilarius hét ok Illoge oðro nafne, B.</note> Illoge hét ok var Biarnar son<note place=apparatus id=an546.2>ok var Biarnar son] add. C.</note>. Hann <anchor id=a546.2>einn varð til þess búenn af virðolegom m&aolig;nnom í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge, <anchor id=a546.3>at rísa upp af sínne f&aolig;ðor-leifð, fyrer Goðs sakar ok <anchor id=a546.4>nauðsynja heilagrar kirkjo; þvi at áðr h&aolig;fðo veret langar þ&oeacute;for <anchor id=a546.5>h&aolig;fðingja í miðle, hverr upp skylde rísa af sínne f&aolig;ðor-leifð ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a546.6>staðfesto, ok varð enge til búenn nema siá einn. Ok má þat <anchor id=a546.7>&aolig;llom m&aolig;nnom auð-sætt vesa, at þetta g&oelig;rðe hann fyr Goðs sakar; <anchor id=a546.8>ok m&oelig;nde þess vænta, sem framn man hafa komet, at Goð m&oelig;nde <anchor id=a546.9>gefa hónom fagrar vister í eilífre full-sælo, sú es at rétto má kallasc <anchor id=a546.10>f&aolig;ðor-leifð góðra manna<note place=apparatus id=an546.3><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>manna]</ab> Fór sá same Hilarius síðan í Vestr-hóp til Breiða-bólstaðar, ok hvíler hans líkame þar, en onden með Goðe í eilífom fagnaðe.&mdash;<hi>Laurent. Saga</hi>, ch. 2.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=7.2><anchor id=a546.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ok á þesso sumre þá ferr byscops-emne til skips með f&aolig;ro-neyte <anchor id=a546.12>því, es ætlað vas hónom, ok fiár-hlutom; ok hafðe hann <anchor id=a546.13>með ser bréf ok innsigle Giz&oelig;rar byscops, þau es vitne b&aoacute;ro um <anchor id=a546.14>hans &oelig;rende. Ok es þeir vóro búner, léto þeir í haf; ok es ecke <anchor id=a546.15>sagt frá ferð þeirra fyrr an þeir kómo í Danm&aolig;rk, ok urðo vel<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a546.16>reið-fara. Enn helge Ioan byscops-efne sótte þegar á fund Oz&oelig;rar <anchor id=a546.17>erki-byscops, ok kom til þess staðar es erki-byscop vas staddr, ok <anchor id=a546.18>heldr síð dags.

<p n=7.3><anchor id=a546.19><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Erki-byscop vas at kirkjo at aftan-s&oelig;ng; ok es enn helge <anchor id=a546.20>Ioan byscops-efne k&oelig;mr í kirkjona þá vas loket miok aftan-s&oelig;ng-<hi>v</hi>enom.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a546.21>Hann nemr staðar fyr útan córenn, ok hefr upp aftan-s&oelig;ng <anchor id=a546.22>sínn með clercom sínom. Erki-byscop hafðe bannat clercom <anchor id=a547.1><pb id=pb547 n=547><note place=margin>[160: 8.]</note>sínom &aolig;llom, ellrom sem yngrom, at líta útar or córnom meðan <anchor id=a547.2>tíðer være sungnar, ok lagt víte við ef af því være brugðet sem <anchor id=a547.3>hann bauð. En iam-skiótt sem erki-byscop heyrðe s&oelig;ngenn ens <anchor id=a547.4>helga Ioans, þá lítr hann útar efter kirkjonne, ok vilde vita hverr <anchor id=a547.5>sá maðr være es líka r&aolig;dd hafðe. En es loket vas aftan-s&oelig;ng-<hi>v</hi>enom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a547.6>þá mælto clercar erki-byscops við hann sialfan: &lsquo;Hvat es <anchor id=a547.7>nú, herra byscop, hafeð-ér nú eige sialfer gengeð á þau l&aolig;g sem ér <anchor id=a547.8>settoð!&rsquo; Erki-byscop svaraðe: &lsquo;Ek iáte því, at þat es satt sem <anchor id=a547.9>ér segeð; en þó hefer mer þetta eige fyre &oelig;nga s&aolig;k at borezc, þvi <anchor id=a547.10>at r&aolig;dd hefer boret fyre eyro mer, þá es ek hefe eige slíka fyrr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a547.11>heyrða, ok heldr má hon þyckja engla r&aolig;ddom <hi>g</hi>lík an manna.&rsquo; <anchor id=a547.12>Heðan af má þat marka, es fyrr kómom ver orðe á í s&aolig;gonne, hverso <anchor id=a547.13>miok r&aolig;dd ens helga Ioans vas frá því sem flestra manna annarra, <anchor id=a547.14>at vitra manna virðingo. En es Ioan hafðe loket aftan-s&oelig;ng <anchor id=a547.15>sínom, þá geck hann á fund erki-byscops, ok tók hann við hónom<note place=apparatus id=an547.1><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok t. h. við hónom]</ab> add. 235.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a547.16>virðolega, ok bauð hónom til sín, ok &aolig;llo f&aolig;ro-neyte hans.

<p><anchor id=a547.17>Ok es enn helge Ioan hafðe skamma stund veret með erki-byscope, <anchor id=a547.18>þá bar hann upp fyrer erki-byscop &oelig;rende sín, ok sýnde <anchor id=a547.19>hónom bréf ok innsigle Giz&oelig;rar byscops. Ok es þeir h&aolig;fðo <anchor id=a547.20>n&oelig;ckora daga um þetta r&oeacute;tt með þeim &aolig;ðrom lærðom m&aolig;nnom,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a547.21>sem erki-byscop vilde þetta mál fyrer bera, ok es þetta vas vand&shy;lega <anchor id=a547.22>rann-sakat, þá mæler erki-byscop við byscops-efne: &lsquo;Svá <anchor id=a547.23>kannasc mer til, enn kærste bróðer, sem þú munt flesta alla hlute <anchor id=a547.24>til þess hafa, at þú sér til byscops fallenn; ok því trúe-ek, at sæll <anchor id=a548.1><pb id=pb548 n=548><note place=margin>[161 : 9.]</note>sé sá lýðr, es slíkan byscop má hafa yfer ser. En fyr sakar eins <anchor id=a548.2>hlutar þess es þú hefer sagt mer, at þú hefer tvær konor áttar, þá <anchor id=a548.3>þore-ek eige at vígja þik án leyfe páva ok vit-orðe hans sialfs. <anchor id=a548.4>Nú fyrer þessa s&aolig;k es þat várt ráð, at þú farer sem skiótazt máttú <anchor id=a548.5>á fund páfa; ok vér monom ríta með þer með óro innsigle, ok tiá<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a548.6>páfanom þítt mál. Ok ef svá verðr, sem ver viljom vætta<note place=apparatus id=an548.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> vænta, Cd.</note>, at <anchor id=a548.7>hann leyfe þer vígslo at taka, en oss at g&oelig;ra, þá kom aftr til mín <anchor id=a548.8>sem skiótazt, ok mon-ek þá með fagnaðe láta lúkasc þítt eyrende.&rsquo;

<p n=7.5><anchor id=a548.9><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Efter þetta ferr enn helge Ioan byscops-emne til Roma-borgar, <anchor id=a548.10>ok es hann k&oelig;mr þar, þá vas vel teket hans mále af páfa. Þá vas<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a548.11>páfe, es enn helge Ioan kom suðr, enn helge Paschal<hi>is</hi>, sá es <anchor id=a548.12>annarr vas með því nafne. Enn helge Ioan berr upp<note place=apparatus id=an548.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>upp]</ab> here ends AM. 235.</note> fyr pávan <anchor id=a548.13>&aolig;ll sín eyrende, ok þar með sýner hann hónom bréf erki-byscops, <anchor id=a548.14>ok inn-sigle þau, es tiáðo páva mála-v&aolig;xto alla, es á hans mále <anchor id=a548.15>vóro. Ok es páve hafðe séð riteð, þá veiter hann þat þeckilega es<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a548.16>hann vas líti-látlega beðenn, ok vísar enom helga (Ioane) byscops-efne <anchor id=a548.17>á fund Oz&oelig;rar erki-byscops, ok ritar til hans með síno innsigle, <anchor id=a548.18>ok gefr hónom leyfe á, at vígja enn helga Ioan til byscops.

<p n=7.6><anchor id=a548.19><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Ok es Ioan hafðe teket blezan af pávanom, þá ferr hann <anchor id=a548.20>aftr á leið, ok k&oelig;mr með síno f&aolig;ro-neyte á fund Oz&oelig;rar erki-byscops.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a548.21>Ok es (hann) verðr þess varr af bréfom páva, þeim es <anchor id=a548.22>enn helge Ioan bar frá páfa funde, at hónom vas fullt frelse á gefet <anchor id=a548.23>at vígja hann, þá verðr erki-byscop forkunnlega feginn, ok þackar <anchor id=a549.1><pb id=pb549 n=549><note place=margin>[162 : 10.]</note>Alm&aoacute;tkom Goðe, es hónom skylde þess auðet verða, at láta þat <anchor id=a549.2>&oelig;rende ens helga Ioans verða, sem menn mundo vilja; ok beið <anchor id=a549.3>hann nú með si&aolig;lfom erki-byscope þeirrar stundar, es hónom <anchor id=a549.4>sýndesc til fellt at vígja hann. Efter þat kallar erki-byscop saman <anchor id=a549.5>kenne-menn þá sem við þyrfto at vesa þetta embætte; ok at &aolig;llom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a549.6>hlutom til búnom, þá víger hann enn helga Ioan til byscops á <anchor id=a549.7>Dróttens-dege, tveim nóttom fyrer Tveggja-Postola-messo Philippi <anchor id=a549.8>ok Iacobi, þat es þriðja <hi>kalendas Maii</hi>. Efter þat es enn helge <anchor id=a549.9>Ioan vas vígðr, þá dvalðesc hann með erki-byscope, ok þá af hónom <anchor id=a549.10>m&aolig;rg hialpsamleg r&aoacute;ð si&aolig;lfom ser til nytsemðar ok því folke<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a549.11>sem hann vas yfer settr.

<p n=7.7><anchor id=a549.12><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Enn helge Ioan vas vígðr til byscops, efter því sem nú vas frá <anchor id=a549.13>sagt, þá es hann hafðe fióra vetr ens sétta tigar at aldre. Þat vas <anchor id=a549.14>á d&aolig;gom Paschalis páfa, ok á d&aolig;gom Noregs konunga Eysteins <anchor id=a549.15>ok Sigurðar. En þá hafðe Giz&oelig;rr byscop stýrt Goðs Cristne iam-lenge<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a549.16>sem Ísleifr byscop faðer hans, en þat vóro fiórer vetr ok <anchor id=a549.17>tottogo.



<p n=8.1><anchor id=a549.18><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Ioan byscop fór út til Íslannz á eno næsta sumre efter, <anchor id=a549.19>es hann hafðe vígðr veret, ok varð vel reið-fara.<note place=apparatus id=an549.1 lang="en-UK"><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> B here adds after the bishop has parted from the archbishop&mdash;<foreign lang=is>fór hann fyrst til Noregs, sýslande ser þar kirkju-við, ok þat sama sumar lætr hann í haf, ok verðr vel reiðfara, ok kemr skip þat á Eyrar fyr sunnan land; <hi lang=en-UK>and farther below</hi>&mdash;(sitjande heima um vetrenn at stóle sínom) en frændr hans ok viner flutto sunnan frá skipe kirkju-við hans í Vinverjadal, en Norðlendingar gerðo þegar efter ok drógo heim til Hóla</foreign> (<hi>certainly unhistorical</hi>).</note> Ok <anchor id=a549.20>brátt efter þat es hann hafðe land teket þá spurðesc hans út-kváma;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a549.21>ok urðo þvi aller fegner góðer menn, ok drifo þegar flockom at <anchor id=a549.22>finna hann. Hann tekr hvers mannz mále iam-léttlega; ok sýner <anchor id=a550.1><pb id=pb550 n=550><note place=margin>[162: 10.]</note>þat í &aolig;llo, at eige vas hann enn af-hoga orðenn því eno helga líti&shy;læte, <anchor id=a550.2>es hann hafðe áðr hann være vígðr til byscops; heldr hafðe <anchor id=a550.3>hann þat nu því gn&oeacute;gra, með &aolig;llom &aolig;ðrom mann-kostom, sem <anchor id=a550.4>nú vas hónom vandara um, svá miok sem hann vas upp hafiðr af <anchor id=a550.5>Alm&aoacute;tkom Goðe til mikellar virðingar.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=8.2><anchor id=a550.6><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ok þegar (es) enn helge Ioan vas búenn at fara frá skipe, þá <anchor id=a550.7>ferr hann heim til stólsens til Hóla, ok tók þegar at stýra vel ok <anchor id=a550.8>fagrlega Cristne Almáttegs Goðs þeirre sem hann vas yfer settr; <anchor id=a550.9>ok sat hann þá heima um vetrenn at stóle sínom. En at sumre þá <anchor id=a550.10>reið hann til Alþingess, ok fundosc þeir þar ok Giz&oelig;rr byscop með<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a550.11>miklom fagnaðe; ok tiáðe Giz&oelig;rr byscop m&aolig;nnom, hverso miket <anchor id=a550.12>gótt menn &aoacute;tto þá Goðe at launa, þau fagnaðar tíðende sem þá <anchor id=a550.13>vóro orðen, es tveir byscopar vóro á landeno; þvi at þat hafðe <anchor id=a550.14>eige orðet áðr síðan es Cristne kom á landet. Marga hlute r&oeacute;ddo <anchor id=a550.15>þeir sín á miðle byscoparner, þá es nytsamleger vóro, ok s&aolig;mðo<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a550.16>til með &aolig;ðrom lærðom m&aolig;nnom hver boð þeir skyldo bióða sínom <anchor id=a550.17>under-m&aolig;nnom.

<p n=8.3><anchor id=a550.18><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Á þesso sumre hóf Ioan byscop yfer-f&aolig;r sína yfer ríke sítt, ok <anchor id=a550.19>tók at stýra Goðs Cristne með mikelle stiórn; hirte hann vánda <anchor id=a550.20>menn af því velde es hónom vas gefet af Goðs h&aolig;lfo, en styrkðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a550.21>góða mann ok siðláta í m&aolig;rgom goðom hlutom.



<p n=9.1><anchor id=a550.22><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Enn helge Ioan byscop hafðe skamma stund at stóle <anchor id=a550.23>seteð at Hólom, áðr an hann lét leggja ofan kirkjo <anchor id=a550.24>þá, es þar vas. Siá kirkja hafðe g&oelig;r vereð næst þeirre es Oxe <anchor id=a550.25>Hialta son hafðe g&oelig;ra láteð. Þat hyggja menn at sú kirkja hafe<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a551.1><pb id=pb551 n=551><note place=margin>[163: 11.]</note>mest g&oelig;r veret under tré-þake á &aolig;llo Íslande, es Oxe lét g&oelig;ra; ok <anchor id=a551.2>lagðe til þeirrar kirkjo mikel auðræðe, ok lét hána búa innan vel ok <anchor id=a551.3>vandlega ok þekja blýe alla. En sú kirkja brann upp &aolig;ll með <anchor id=a551.4>&aolig;llo skrúðe síno at<note place=apparatus id=an551.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>at]</ab> B; ok, Cd.</note> leyndom dóme Goðs. Enn helge Ioan byscop <anchor id=a551.5>lét g&oelig;ra kirkjo at Hólom mikla ok virðolega, sú es stendr þar<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a551.6>í dag, ok hefer hon þó veret bæðe þakið, ok marger hluter aðrer <anchor id=a551.7>at g&oelig;rver síðan. Enn helge Ioan byscop sparðe ecke til þessar <anchor id=a551.8>kirkjo-g&oelig;rðar, þat es þá være meire Goðs dýrð an áðr, ok þetta <anchor id=a551.9>hús være sem fagrlegast g&oelig;rt ok búet.

<p n=9.2><anchor id=a551.10><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hann valðe þann mann til kirkjo-g&oelig;rðarennar, es þá þótte<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a551.11>einn-hverr hagastr vesa: sá hét Þóroddr ok vas Gamla son<note place=apparatus id=an551.2><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok vas Gamla son]</ab> add. B.</note>. Ok <anchor id=a551.12>vas bæðe, at enn helge Ioan sparðe eige at reiða hónom kaupet <anchor id=a551.13>miket ok gótt, enda leyste hann ok sína sýslo vel ok góðmannlega. <anchor id=a551.14>Þat es sagt frá þessom manne, at hann vas svá næmr, (at) þá es <anchor id=a551.15>hann vas í smíðenne, þá heyrðe hann til, es prestlingom vas kend<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a551.16>iðrótt sú es <hi>grammatica</hi> heiter, en svá lodde hónom þat vel í eyrom <anchor id=a551.17>af miklom næmleik ok at-hoga, at hann g&oelig;rðesc enn meste iðróttar-maðr <anchor id=a551.18>í þess-konar náme.



<p n=10.1><anchor id=a551.19><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> Þá er Ioan hafðe skamma stund byscop veret, þá lét <anchor id=a551.20>hann setja scóla heima þar at staðnom vestr frá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a551.21>kirkjo-durom, ok lét smíða vel ok vandlega, <hi rend="class(largebold)">[</hi>ok enn sér merke <anchor id=a551.22>húsanna.<hi rend="class(largebold)">]</hi><note place=apparatus id=an551.3><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok enn ... húsanna]</ab> apparently 14th-century gloss.</note> En til þess at stýra scólanom, ok kenna þeim m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a552.1><pb id=pb552 n=552><note place=margin>[164: 12.]</note>es þar settesc í, þá valðe hann einn enn bazta clerc ok enn sniallazta, <anchor id=a552.2>af Gautlande; hann hét Gísle ok vas Finna son. Hann reidde <anchor id=a552.3>hónom miket kaup til hvárs-tveggja, at kenna prestlingom, ok at <anchor id=a552.4>veita slíkt upp-hald heilagre Cristne með si&aolig;lfom byscope, sem <anchor id=a552.5>hann mátte ser við koma, í kenningom sínom ok for-mælom: ok<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a552.6>ofallt es hann predicaðe fyrer folkeno, þá lét hann liggja bóc fyrer <anchor id=a552.7>ser, ok tók þar af slíkt es hann talaðe fyrer folkeno; ok g&oelig;rðe <anchor id=a552.8>hann þetta mest af forsi&aoacute; ok lítilæte; at þar hann vas ungr at aldre, <anchor id=a552.9>þótte þeim meira um vert es til hlýddo, at þeir sæe þat, at hann <anchor id=a552.10>tók sínar kenningar af helgom bócom, en eigi af eino saman brióst-vite.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a552.11>En svá mikel gift fylgðe þó hans kenningom, at mennener <anchor id=a552.12>þeir es til hlýddo, kómosc við miok ok tóko mikla skipan ok góða <anchor id=a552.13>um sítt ráð. En þat es hann kende í orðonom, þá sýnde hann þat í <anchor id=a552.14>verkonom. Kenningar hans vóro linar ok létt-bærar &aolig;llom góðom <anchor id=a552.15>m&aolig;nnom, en vitrom m&aolig;nnom þótto vesa skaplegar ok skemtelegar;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a552.16>en v&aoacute;ndom m&aolig;nnom varð ótte at mikell ok s&aolig;nn hirting.

<p n=10.2><anchor id=a552.17><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Um allar stór-hótíðer þá vas þar fiol-menne miket, þvi at <anchor id=a552.18>þannog vas þá miket &oelig;rende margra manna, fyrst at hlýða tíðom, <anchor id=a552.19>svá fagrlega sem þær vóro framm f&oeacute;rðar; þar með boðorðom <anchor id=a552.20>byscops, ok kenningom þeim enom dýrðlegom, es þar vas þá kostr<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a552.21>at heyra, hvárt sem heldr vóro framm fluttar af si&aolig;lfom byscope, <anchor id=a552.22>eðe þessom manne es nú vas frá sagt.



<p n=11.1><anchor id=a552.23><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> Skamma stund hafðe enn helge Ioan byscop veret <anchor id=a552.24>áðr hann tók at f&oeacute;ra siðo manna ok h&aoacute;tto miok í <anchor id=a553.1><pb id=pb553 n=553><note place=margin>[164: 12.]</note>annat efne an áðr hafðe veret: g&oelig;rðesc hirtingasamr við ó-siða-menn, <anchor id=a553.2>en vas blíðr ok h&oeacute;gr &aolig;llom góðom m&aolig;nnom; en sýnde á <anchor id=a553.3>si&aolig;lfom ser, at allt þat es hann kende í orðonom, þá fyllde hann <anchor id=a553.4>þat í verkonom. Sýndesc svá vitrom m&aolig;nnom þeim es g&oelig;rst <anchor id=a553.5>visso hans ráð, at hann yrðe sialdan af-hoga því es sialfr Dróttenn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a553.6>mælte til sínna lære-sveina: <hi lang=la>Luceat lux vestra coram hominibus, ut <anchor id=a553.7>videant opera vestra bona, et glorificent patrem vestrum qui in celis <anchor id=a553.8>est</hi>. Þesse orð mæla svá: &lsquo;Lýse liós yðart fyre m&aolig;nnom, til þess <anchor id=a553.9>at þeir sé<note place=apparatus id=an553.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> <ab type=textRef>sé]</ab> seae, Cd.</note> góð-verk yðor, ok dýrke þeir f&aolig;ðor yð<hi>v</hi>arn þann es í <anchor id=a553.10>himnom es.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=11.2><anchor id=a553.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Enn helge Ioan byscop lagðe ríkt við þat sem síðan hefer <anchor id=a553.12>haldezc, at menn skyldo s&oeacute;kja til tíða á helgom d&aolig;gom eða á <anchor id=a553.13>&aolig;ðrom vanda-tíðom; en bauð prestenom at segja oftlega þá hlute <anchor id=a553.14>es þeir þyrfto at vita. Hann bauð m&aolig;nnom, at hafa hvers-daglega <anchor id=a553.15>h&aoacute;tto sem Cristnom m&aolig;nnom sómer, en þat es at s&oeacute;kja hvern<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a553.16>dag, síð ok snemma, cross eða kirkjo, ok flytja þar framm b&oeacute;ner <anchor id=a553.17>sínar með at-hoga. Hann bauð, at menn skyldo hafa, hverr í síno <anchor id=a553.18>herberge, mark ens helga cross til gæzlo si&aolig;lfom ser; ok þegar es <anchor id=a553.19>maðrenn vaknaðe, þá skylde hann signa sik, ok syngja fyrst <hi lang=la>Credo <anchor id=a553.20>in Deum</hi>, ok segja svá trú sína Alm&aoacute;tkom Goðe; ok ganga svá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a553.21>síðan allan dagenn vápnaðr með marke heilags cross, því es hann <anchor id=a553.22>merkðe sik með þegar es hann vaknaðe; en taka aldregi svá svefn <anchor id=a553.23>eða mat eða dryck, at maðr signe sik eige áðr. Hann bauð <anchor id=a553.24>hverjom manne at kunna <hi lang=la>Pater Noster</hi> ok <hi lang=la>Credo in Deum</hi><note place=apparatus id=an553.2><ab type=lineNumRef>24.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Deum]</ab> ok Mariu vers, add. B.</note>, ok <anchor id=a554.1><pb id=pb554 n=554><note place=margin>[165: 13.]</note>minnasc siau sinnom tíða sínna á hverjom dege, epter því sem <anchor id=a554.2>Dávíd propheta seger: <hi lang=la>Sepcies in die laudem tibi dixi, Domine Deus <anchor id=a554.3>meus</hi>. Þat er svá at skilja á Norr&oeacute;no: &lsquo;Siau sinnom á dag sagða-ek <anchor id=a554.4>þer lof, Dróttenn Goð mínn<note place=apparatus id=an554.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>epter því ... Goð mínn]</ab> add. B.</note>;&rsquo; en syngja skyldolega hvert kveld, <anchor id=a554.5>áðr hann sofnaðe, <hi lang=la>Credo in Deum</hi> (ok) <hi lang=la>Pater Noster</hi>. Ok at ver<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a554.6>lúkem<note place=apparatus id=an554.2><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>lúkem]</ab> Cd.</note> þesso male í f&aoacute;m orðom, þá feck hann svá samet siðo sínna <anchor id=a554.7>under-manna á sk&aolig;mmo bragðe með Goðs fulltinge, at heilog <anchor id=a554.8>Cristne í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge hefer aldrege staðet með slíkom <anchor id=a554.9>blóma, hvár<hi>t</hi>ke áðr né síðan, sem þá stóð, meðan folket vas svá <anchor id=a554.10>10 sælt, at þeir h&aolig;fðo slíks byscops stiórn yfer ser.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=11.3><anchor id=a554.11><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Hann bannaðe ok með &aolig;llo alla ú-h&aoacute;tto ok forneskjo, eða <anchor id=a554.12>blótz-skape, g&oelig;rninga eðr galðra; ok reis í móte því með &aolig;llo <anchor id=a554.13>afle; ok hafðe því eige orðet af komet með &aolig;llo meðan Cristnen <anchor id=a554.14>vas ung.

<p><anchor id=a554.15>Hann bannaðe ok alla hindr-vitne þá es forner menn h&aolig;fðo<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a554.16>teket af tungl-kv&aoacute;mom eða d&oeacute;grom; eða eigna daga heiðnom <anchor id=a554.17>m&aolig;nnom eða goðom,&mdash;sem es at kalla Týrs-dag<note place=apparatus id=an554.3><ab type=lineNumRef>17.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Týrs-dag]</ab> add. B.</note>, Óðens-dag eða <anchor id=a554.18>Þórs, ok svá um alla vico-daga; en bauð at hafa þat daga-tal, sem <anchor id=a554.19>heilager feðr hafa sett í ritningom, ok kalla annan dag viko, ok <anchor id=a554.20>þriðja dag, ok svá út<note place=apparatus id=an554.4><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok svá ... svá út]</ab> add. B.</note>,&mdash;ok alla þá hlute aðra, es hónom þótto af<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a554.21>íllom rótom rísa.

<p n=11.4><anchor id=a554.22><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Leikr sá vas m&aolig;nnom tíðr, es ú-fagrlegr es, at kveðasc skyldo <anchor id=a554.23>at, karl-maðr at kono, en kona at karl-manne, kl&oeacute;kilegar vísor <anchor id=a555.1><pb id=pb555 n=555><note place=margin>[165: 13.]</note>ok hæðelegar, ok ó-áheyrelegar: en þat lét hann af takazc, ok <anchor id=a555.2>bannaðe með &aolig;llo at g&oelig;ra; man-s&oelig;ngs-kvæðe eða vísor vilde <anchor id=a555.3>hann eige heyra kveðen, ok eige láta kveða; þó feck hann því eige <anchor id=a555.4>með &aolig;llo af komet.

<p><anchor id=a555.5>[Double text, B.] Leikr sá var kærr m&aolig;nnom áðr en enn heilagr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a555.6>Ioan varð byscop, at kveða skylde karlmaðr til kono í danz <anchor id=a555.7>blautleg kvæðe ok regeleg, ok kona til karlmannz man-s&oelig;ngs vísor. <anchor id=a555.8>Þenna leik lét hann af taka, ok bannaðe styrklega.

<p n=11.5><anchor id=a555.9><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þat es sagt í frá, at hann kom á hlióð, at Kl&oeacute;ngr Þórsteins <anchor id=a555.10>son, sá es síðan varð byscop í Scála-holte, en vas þá prestlingr ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a555.11>ungr at aldre, las bóc þá es k&aolig;lloð es <hi lang=la>Ovidius, De Arte</hi><note place=apparatus id=an555.1><p><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>De Arte]</ab> B; epistolarum, Cd.

<p>B adds:&mdash;En í þeirre bók talar meistare Ovidius um kvenna-áster, ok kenner með hverjom hætte menn skolo þær gilja, ok nálgaz þeirra vilja.

<p lang=en-UK>And in this book master Ovidius talketh of the love of women, and teacheth in what ways men may beguile them and get their will of them.</note>. Í þeirre <anchor id=a555.12>bóc býr man-s&oelig;ngr mikell; en hann bannaðe hónom at lesa þess-konar <anchor id=a555.13>b&oeacute;cr; ok kallaðe þó hverjom manne mundo &oeacute;ret h&aolig;fogt at <anchor id=a555.14>gæta sín við líkamlegre munoð ok rangre &aoacute;st, þó at hann kveykðe <anchor id=a555.15>eige upp hog sínn með ne einom dictom<note place=apparatus id=an555.2><p><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> <ab type=textRef>dictom]</ab> B; siðom, A.

<milestone unit=tb rend=space>

<p>C (AM. 392) has a third recension of § 4:&mdash;Leikr ... í þann tíma er heldr var ó-fagr, at bera bottatillde (<hi lang=en-UK>read</hi> bottafilde), þar skylde karlmaðr kveða at kono ... vísor ó-tilheyrilegar með mansongs sneið-yrðe ok sám-yrðe. <foreign lang=en-UK>A play &ast;&ast;&ast; at that time that was very unseemly, to carry on butt-fillings, wherein the man recited to the woman licentious verses not fit to be heard, with insinuations of love and foul words.</foreign></note> eða þess-konar kvæðom.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=11.6><anchor id=a555.16><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Hann vas ok iðenn at því, at sníða af m&aolig;nnom lióta (l&aolig;sto); <anchor id=a555.17>ok svá fór hann k&oeacute;nlega með því, at sá kom nálega einge á hans <anchor id=a555.18>fund, at eige fenge hann á n&oelig;ckora lund leið-réttan fyrer sakar <anchor id=a555.19>goðlegrar ástar, ok kost-gæfe þeirrar es hann lagðe á hverjom <anchor id=a556.1><pb id=pb556 n=556><note place=margin>[166: 13.]</note>manne at hialpa. Ok ef hann lagðe m&aolig;nnom harðar skrifter á <anchor id=a556.2>hendr fyrer sakar mikella gl&oeacute;pa, en þeir genge under vel ok líti&shy;látlega, <anchor id=a556.3>þá vas skamt at bíða, áðr (et) helgasta hans brióst, þat es <anchor id=a556.4>Heilagr Ande hafðe valeð ser til bygðar: þá sam-harmaðe hann <anchor id=a556.5>þeirra meinlætom, ok létte þá n&oelig;ckot skriftonom; ok þá s&aolig;mo<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a556.6>menn es hann hafðe fyrr barða fyr sakar goðlegrar ástar ok um-vandanar, <anchor id=a556.7>þeim enom s&aolig;mom líknaðe hann þá miskunnsamlega, <anchor id=a556.8>es þeir vóro við skilðer sína annmarka. Ok sá es alla sína under-menn <anchor id=a556.9>elskaðe sem br&oeacute;ðr eða<note place=apparatus id=an556.1><ab type=lineNumRef>9.</ab> syne, Cd.</note> sono, þá f&oeacute;ddesc hann af engra <anchor id=a556.10>þeirra ann-m&aolig;rkom eða van-h&aolig;gom, en sam-fagnaðe því es &aolig;ðrom<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a556.11>geck vel; en harmaðe þat allt es annan veg varð. Hann vas svá <anchor id=a556.12>hog-góðr, at varla mátte hann siá eða vita þat es m&aolig;nnom vas til <anchor id=a556.13>meins, en svá &oelig;rr ok mildr við fát&oeacute;ka menn, at varla hafðe hans <anchor id=a556.14>make fengezc.  Hann vas sannr faðer allra fát&oeacute;kra manna; <anchor id=a556.15>huggaðe hann eckjor ok f&aolig;ðor-lausa; ok enge kom svá harm-þrungenn<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a556.16>á hans fund, at eige fenge á nockorn veg huggan af hans <anchor id=a556.17>til-stille. Svá vas hann ást-sæll við allt folk, at enge vilde nálega <anchor id=a556.18>hónom í móte g&oelig;ra; ok vas þat meirr saker goðlegrar ástar, <anchor id=a556.19>þeirrar es aller menn unno hónom, an líkamlegrar <hi>h</hi>ræzlo; ok þar <anchor id=a556.20>es hann braut sína fýse í marga staðe, en g&oelig;rðe Goðs vilja, ef<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a556.21>hann fann þat, at þat vas eige allt eitt fyrer saker líkamlegs eðless, <anchor id=a556.22>þá launaðe Goð hónom þat svá í h&aolig;nd þegar, at hann okaðe under <anchor id=a556.23>hann alla under-menn í heilagre hlýðne. Enn heilagr Johannes <anchor id=a556.24>lifðe líf sítt efter goðlegre setningo ok góðra manna d&oeacute;mom; vas <anchor id=a557.1><pb id=pb557 n=557><note place=margin>[167: 14.]</note>á b&oeacute;nom nætr ok daga, ok fastaðe l&aolig;ngom; ok deydde sik í <anchor id=a557.2>m&aolig;rgom hlutom til þess, at þá mætte hann meira á-v&aolig;xt gialda <anchor id=a557.3>Goðe an áðr, af þeim hlutom &aolig;llom es hónom vóro á hende <anchor id=a557.4>folgner.



<p n=12.1><anchor id=a557.5><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> Ok til þess at hann mætte þá vesa friálsare an áðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a557.6>tíðer at veita, eða for-mæle, eða aðra hlute þá <anchor id=a557.7>framm at f&oeacute;ra, es Goðs Cristne være mest upp-hald at, þá valðe <anchor id=a557.8>hann menn til forráða fyrer staðenn með ser, þá es fyrer skyldo <anchor id=a557.9>siá staðarens eign með huspreyjo þeirre g&aolig;fogre es hann hafðe <anchor id=a557.10>áðr átta es Valdís hét<note place=apparatus id=an557.1><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>es Valdís hét]</ab> add. 392.</note>.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=12.2><anchor id=a557.11><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Einn af þeim m&aolig;nnom vas prestr virðolegr, sá es Hámundr <anchor id=a557.12>hét, Biarnar son; hann vas afi<note place=apparatus id=an557.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> <ab type=textRef>afi]</ab> foðor-faðer, B.</note> Hildar nunno, ok einseto-kono [sem <anchor id=a557.13>enn man geteð verða síðarr í þesso mále]<note place=apparatus id=an557.3><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>mále]</ab> viz. in the Miracle Book appended, but not given here.</note>. Næst Hámunde vas at <anchor id=a557.14>r&aoacute;ðom prestr sá es Hialte hét, ok vas frænde byscops. Af leik&shy;m&aolig;nnom <anchor id=a557.15>vas sá maðr með í r&aoacute;ðom, es vas g&aolig;fogr at ætt; hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a557.16>hét Orn, ok vas son Þórkels af Víðe-mýre. Þesser menn &aolig;nnoðosc <anchor id=a557.17>mest þat es til staðarens kom, ok skipoðo m&aolig;nnom til sýslo, sumom <anchor id=a557.18>til at-flutningar við staðenn um þá hlute es þurfa (þótte). Sumer <anchor id=a557.19>vóro setter til verknaðar; sumer at þióna fát&oeacute;kom m&aolig;nnom; ok <anchor id=a557.20>vas byscop vandr at því, at þat være miskunnsamlega g&oelig;rt: sumer<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a557.21>at taka við gestom; þvi at á hverre hótíð sótto menn á fund <anchor id=a557.22>byscops, hundrað manna eðr stundom tvau hundroð eða n&oelig;ckoro <anchor id=a557.23>fleire; þvi at enn heilage Ioan hafðe þat í formælom sínom, at <anchor id=a558.1><pb id=pb558 n=558><note place=margin>[168: 14.]</note>hónom þótte þvi at eino til fullz, ef hverr maðr í héraðeno, sá es <anchor id=a558.2>fóta sínna hefðe for-ráð<note place=apparatus id=an558.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fóta s. h. for-ráð]</ab> B; fong hefðe á, Cd. um sinn] B; til sín, Cd.</note>, k&oeacute;me um sinn et siallnasta at vitja <anchor id=a558.3>staðarens at Hólom á tolf m&aoacute;noðom. Ok fyrer þá s&aolig;k varð þar <anchor id=a558.4>svá fiol-mennt at Skír-dege eða Pascom, at þar skorte eige fiogor <anchor id=a558.5>hundroð manna, allt saman, karlar ok konor. Ok þó at marger<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a558.6>af þessom m&aolig;nnom hefðe vister með ser, þá vóro hiner fleire es á <anchor id=a558.7>byscops koste vóro, ok af hónom vóro sadder bæðe andlegre f&oeacute;zlo <anchor id=a558.8>ok líkamlegre, ok styrkðer með byscoplegre blezan fóro með <anchor id=a558.9>fagnaðe til sínna heim-kynna.

<p n=12.3><anchor id=a558.10><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Marger siðláter menn réðosc þangat heim til staðarens, ok<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a558.11>g&aoacute;fo fé með ser&mdash;en sumer f&oeacute;ddo sik sialfer&mdash;til þess at hlýða <anchor id=a558.12>kenningom byscops ok tíða-g&oelig;rð; ok g&oelig;rðo ser hús um<hi>b</hi>-hverfis <anchor id=a558.13>kirkjo-garðenn.

<p n=12.4><anchor id=a558.14><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Heilagr Ioan byscop tók marga menn til læringar, ok feck til <anchor id=a558.15>góða meistara at kenna þeim: Gísla Finna-son, es fyrr g&aoacute;tom ver,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a558.16>at kenna <hi>grammaticam</hi>; en Ríkinna prest, einn franzeis<note place=apparatus id=an558.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>einn franzeis]</ab> add. B.</note>, capalín <anchor id=a558.17>sínn ok ást-vin, at kenna s&oelig;ng eða versa-g&oelig;rð; þvi at hann vas <anchor id=a558.18>ok enn meste lærdóms-maðr. Þá vas þat ecke hús nálega, at eige <anchor id=a558.19>være n&oelig;ckot iðnat í, þat es til nytsemðar vas. Þat vas enna ellre <anchor id=a558.20>manna h&aoacute;ttr, at kenna enom yngrom; enn ener yngre ritoðo þá<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a558.21>es náms varð í miðle. Þeir vóro aller sam-þycker, ok eige deildo <anchor id=a558.22>þeir; ok einge &aolig;fundaðe annan. Ok þegar es til vas hringt tíða, <anchor id=a559.1><pb id=pb559 n=559><note place=margin>[168, 171:  14, 17.]</note>þá kómo þeir þar aller, ok flutto framm tíðer sínar með miklom <anchor id=a559.2>at-hoga; vas ecke at heyra í córenn nema fagr s&oelig;ngr, ok heilakt <anchor id=a559.3>b&oeacute;na-hald. Ener ellre menn kunno ser at vesa vel siðaðer; en <anchor id=a559.4>smá-sveinar vóro svá hirter af meistorom sínom, at þeir skylde eige <anchor id=a559.5>treystasc með gá-leyse at fara.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=12.5><anchor id=a559.6><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þesser kenne-menn f&oeacute;ddosc upp under hende Ioane byscope: <anchor id=a559.7>Kl&oeacute;ngr es fyrr vas nefndr, es síðan varð byscop í Scála-holte, ok <anchor id=a559.8>prýdde þann stað í sínne bóca-g&oelig;rð; ok þar vas hann um daga <anchor id=a559.9>Ketils byscops, ok svá Biarnar byscops, vin-sæll við alla góða <anchor id=a559.10>menn. Þar vas ok lærðr Vilmundr, enn fyrste ábóte at Þingeyrom;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a559.11>ok Hreinn ábóte; þar vas ok lærðr Bi&aolig;rn byscop, sá es enn þriðe <anchor id=a559.12>vas byscop at Hólom. Marger vóro þar virðoleger kenne-menn <anchor id=a559.13>aðrer upp f&oeacute;dder ok lærðer, þó at ver nefnem þá eige<note place=apparatus id=an559.1><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>eige]</ab> here falls in the interpolation of miracles.</note>.



<p n=13.1><anchor id=a559.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> Þá es enn helge Ioan hafðe skamma stund at stóle seteð, <anchor id=a559.15>þá g&oelig;rðe m&aolig;nnom ráð sítt ó-h&oeacute;gt; gnúðe á hallære<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a559.16>miket, ísar mikler ok<note place=apparatus id=an559.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ísar m. ok]</ab> add. B.</note> veðrátta k&aolig;ld, svá at i&aolig;rð vas ecki í-gróðra at <anchor id=a559.17>vár-ðinge. Enn helge Ioan byscop fór til vár-þings þess es vas at Þing-eyrom; <anchor id=a559.18>ok es hann kom þar, þá heitr hann til árs, við sam-þycke <anchor id=a559.19>allra manna, at þar skylde reisa kirkjo ok b&oeacute;, ok skyldo aller þar til <anchor id=a559.20>leggja, þar til es sá staðr yrðe efldr. Efter heit þetta lagðe enn<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a559.21>helge Ioan af ser skickjo sina, ok markaðe sialfr grund-v&aolig;ll under <anchor id=a559.22>kirkjona. En svá sn&oelig;resc skiótt ráð manna á-leiðess, at á þeirre <anchor id=a560.1><pb id=pb560 n=560><note place=margin>[172: 17.]</note>s&aolig;mo vico vóro á brauto ísar<note place=apparatus id=an560.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> haf-ísar, B.</note> þeir aller es þetta hallære hafðe af <anchor id=a560.2>staðet at miklom hluta, svá at hverge varð vart við; en i&aolig;rðen <anchor id=a560.3>skipaðesc svá skiótt við til gróðrar, at á þeirre s&aolig;mo vico vóro <anchor id=a560.4>sauð-gr&aolig;s nær &oeacute;ren.

<p n=13.2><anchor id=a560.5><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Sá hlutr lá á staðnum á Hólom, at þar vas báss einn sá í<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a560.6>fióse es eige hlýdde naut á at binda, þvi at hvert lá dautt um <anchor id=a560.7>morgonenn es um aftanenn vas á bundet. Þat vas eitt-hvert haust, <anchor id=a560.8>at enn helge Ioan geck til meðr ráðs-manne at ætla naut til lífs, <anchor id=a560.9>þau es heima þar skyldo vesa at staðnom. Ok es þeir h&aolig;fðo til <anchor id=a560.10>ætlað, þá seger nauta-maðr hónom<note place=apparatus id=an560.2><ab type=lineNumRef>10.</ab> <ab type=textRef>hónom]</ab> emend.; þeim, Cd.</note> deile á, at eige mundo nauten svá<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a560.11>m&aolig;rg rúm hafa með þvi at bássenn einn vas ó-tyttr<note place=apparatus id=an560.3><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ó-tyttr]</ab> B; ónýtr, Cd.</note>. Byscop kvað <anchor id=a560.12>svá vesa skyldo, sem hann kvað á ok ætlaðe til, ok kvað svá skyldo <anchor id=a560.13>binda á þann bás sem á aðra: ok svá vas g&oelig;rt. En um morgonenn <anchor id=a560.14>efter es til fióss vas komet, þá lá kýr á báse þeim (enom) <anchor id=a560.15>sama, ok vas dauð. Þat vas sagt byscope, ok bað hann binda<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a560.16>þangat naut annat, ok et þriðja, ok dó þau. Þá mælte nauta-maðr <anchor id=a560.17>við byscop: &lsquo;Hverso lenge skal svá framm fara sem nú es?&rsquo; <anchor id=a560.18>Byscop svarar: &lsquo;Svá skal á meðan nauten nockor ero til, ef Goð <anchor id=a560.19>vill at staðr siá eyðesc fyrer þessar saker.&rsquo; Efter þetta lét af, ok <anchor id=a560.20>sigraðe Ioan byscop svá þetta ó-frelse með trú sínne ok stað-feste.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p n=13.3><anchor id=a560.21><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þat vas enn eitt hvert vár, at váraðe svá seint, at i&aolig;rð vas lítt <anchor id=a560.22>í-gróðra at Far-d&aolig;gom. Þá reið enn helge Ioan byscop til Alþingess, <anchor id=a560.23>ok hét þar til ár-bótar m&aolig;nnom Ioans-messo Baptiste; ok es hann <anchor id=a561.1><pb id=pb561 n=561><note place=margin>[172: 18.]</note>hafðe fyrer skilt heiteno, ok þat vas fest, þá mælte hann þessom <anchor id=a561.2>orðom á efter: &lsquo;Þat vilda-ek, at Goð gæfe oss nú þegar d&oelig;ggena:&rsquo; <anchor id=a561.3>ok lýstesc þat í því, at hann vas miok bráð-látr maðr. Sumaret <anchor id=a561.4>hafðe veret þurko-samt áðr, svá at eige hafðe geteð d&oelig;ggvar, ok <anchor id=a561.5>vóro fyrer því gr&aolig;sen nær einge. Ok þá es enn helge Ioan byscop<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a561.6>hét, þá vas svá þunnt veðr ok hreint, at hverge sá ský á himne. <anchor id=a561.7>En þá es hann hóf upp <hi lang=la>Gloria in excelis</hi> þann dag í messo, þá <anchor id=a561.8>kom regn svá miket af himne, at m&aolig;nnom þótte íll-vært úte fyrer <anchor id=a561.9>vát-viðris s&aolig;kom. Þaðan í frá um sumaret vóro d&oelig;ggvar um nætr, <anchor id=a561.10>en sól-skin um daga; ok geck því n&oelig;ckora stund: gras-v&aolig;xtr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a561.11>varð þat sumar til meðal-lags.

<p n=13.4><anchor id=a561.12><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Þesse enn helge Ioan byscop vas prýddr af Goðe í m&aolig;rgom <anchor id=a561.13>merkilegom firir-burðom ok f&aolig;grom vitronom; ok vas þat eige <anchor id=a561.14>all-kynlegt, at hónom være marger merkeleger hluter í svefnenom <anchor id=a561.15>sýnder; þvi at hann hafðe eige meira svefnenn an hann mátte<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a561.16>minztan nýta; en hugrenn vas iafnan, áðr hann sofnaðe ok þegar <anchor id=a561.17>hann vaknaðe, á Goðs þiónosto ok heilogo b&oeacute;na-halde.

<p n=13.5><anchor id=a561.18><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Þat bar fyrer hann á þeirre s&aolig;mo nótt sem andaðesc suðr <anchor id=a561.19>í Scála-holte Þórkell prestr fóst-bróðer hans<note place=apparatus id=an561.1><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> fóstre Ioans biskups frá dauða foðor hans, C.</note>, ok Trandill hét &aolig;ðro <anchor id=a561.20>nafne: hann vas enn virðolegste kenne-maðr. Þat vas efter nátt-s&oelig;ng<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a561.21>þá<note place=apparatus id=an561.2><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>þá]</ab> þar, Cd.</note> es enn helge Ioan byscop vas komenn í hvílo; ok iam-skiótt <anchor id=a561.22>sem hann hneigðe sik at h&oeacute;gende, rann þegar h&aolig;fge á hann, <anchor id=a561.23>ok þótte hónom sem maðr genge inn, sá es hann kende eige, ok <anchor id=a562.1><pb id=pb562 n=562><note place=margin>[173: 19.]</note>næme stað í miðjo herbergeno. Hónom þótte sem sá maðr være <anchor id=a562.2>spurðr af þeim m&aolig;nnom sem við vóro ef hann segðe n&oelig;ckot nýrra <anchor id=a562.3>tíðenda. En hann sagðe: &lsquo;Þórkel helgan.&rsquo; Eige mælte hann <anchor id=a562.4>fleira. Byscop vaknaðe, ok spratt upp þegar, ok kallaðe á Rikinna <anchor id=a562.5>erki-prest sínn, ok mælte við hann: &lsquo;Rís upp þú bróðer, ok f&aolig;rom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a562.6>til kirkjo, ok lofom Almátkan Goð, þvi at Þórkell prestr, bróðer <anchor id=a562.7>ockarr, es nú liðenn af þesso lífe; ok skolom vit nú fela &aolig;nd hans <anchor id=a562.8>Alm&aoacute;tkom Goðe á hende.&rsquo; Spurt h&aolig;fðo þeir at hann vas siúkr. <anchor id=a562.9>Þeir fóro þá til kirkjo, ok héldo s&aoacute;lo-tíðom; ok þá seger hann <anchor id=a562.10>prestenom Rikinna hvat fyrer hann hafðe boret.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>


<p rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a562.11>[Á eno tolfta áre byscopsdóms ens heilaga Ioans byscops urðo morg stór-tíðende. <anchor id=a562.12>Þá andaðesc Gizorr byscop í Scála-holte, þrim togom nóttom síðarr an Þorlákr <anchor id=a562.13>Rúnolfsson t&oeacute;ke byscops vígslo: þat vas á þriðia dag viko v <hi>kal. Junii</hi>. Þorlákr <anchor id=a562.14>vas k&oelig;renn<note place=apparatus id=an562.1><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> kosenn, Cd.</note> til byscops at b&oeacute;n Gizorar byscops, eino sumre fyrr æn Gizorr byscop <anchor id=a562.15>andaðesc. Gizorr vas byscop xxx ok vj vetr. Þá vas liðet frá Burð Cristz m.c.xviii<note place=apparatus id=an562.2><ab type=lineNumRef>15.</ab> mc.ix (for mc.xi), B.</note><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a562.16>ár. Á því áre eno sama andaðesc Pascalis papa; Baldvine Iorsala konungr; <anchor id=a562.17>Arnaldus patriarcha í Hierusalem; Cirialax Girkja (konungr); Philippus Svia <anchor id=a562.18>konungr. Þá vas liðet frá falle Óláfs konungs Tryggva-sonar c ok xviij vetr.]


<p n=13.6><anchor id=a562.19><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Eitt-hvert sinn, þá es heilagr Ioan hafðe til svefns lagzt einhverja <anchor id=a562.20>nótt, þá bar fyrer hann sýn. Hann þóttesc staddr vesa á<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a562.21>b&oeacute;n sínne fyrer einom miklom róðo-crosse; ok því næst þótte <anchor id=a562.22>hónom lícnesket á crossenom hneigjasc at ser ok mæla n&oelig;ckor <anchor id=a562.23>orð í eyra ser, ok vito ver eige hver þau vóro; þessa sýn sagðe <anchor id=a562.24>hann Rikinna preste, ok vas einge sá es ráða kynne. En enn <anchor id=a562.25>næsta dag efter, þá kómo á fund heilags Ioans byscops þeir menn<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a562.26>es þá vóro ný-komner af hafe, ok f&oeacute;rðo hónom bóc eina. Á þeirre <anchor id=a562.27>bóc vas sá at-burðr ritaðr es á þesso lande vas þá miok ó-kunnr, <anchor id=a563.1><pb id=pb563 n=563><note place=margin>[174: 21.]</note>sagt frá því, es Gyðingar píndo lícneskjo várs herra Jesu Christi á <anchor id=a563.2>crosse í borg þeirre es Berytho heiter<note place=apparatus id=an563.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>á crosse ... heiter]</ab> add. 392 (wr. Bericho).</note>, efter þeim hætte sem þeir <anchor id=a563.3>h&aolig;fðo fyrr píndan Dróttenn várn Iesum Christum; þeir b&aolig;rdo lícnesket <anchor id=a563.4>með svipom, ok spýtto á þat, ok g&aoacute;fo því hals-h&oelig;gg: efter <anchor id=a563.5>þat cross-festo þeir þat, ok gengo síðan fyrer crossenn ok skelkto<note place=apparatus id=an563.2><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> skeklto, Cd.</note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a563.6>at lícneskeno efter d&oeacute;mom enna fyrre Gyðinga. Efter þat tóko <anchor id=a563.7>þeir spiót, ok l&aolig;gðo grimmlega í síðo lícneskeno. Þá varð dá&shy;samlegr <anchor id=a563.8>at-burðr ok fá-heyrðr: vatn með blóðe hlióp or síðo lícneskeno, <anchor id=a563.9>ok af því blóðe ok vatne fengo marger siúker menn heilso. <anchor id=a563.10>Ok es Gyðingar s&aoacute; þenna at-burð allan iam-saman, þá g&oelig;rðo þeir<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a563.11>iðran af &aolig;llo hiarta, ok sn&oelig;rosc til Goðs. Ok es heilagr Ioan <anchor id=a563.12>byscop ok Rikíne prestr h&aolig;fðo leset þenna at-burð, þá mælte <anchor id=a563.13>prestrenn við byscop brosande: &lsquo;Sé her nú, faðer, draum þann es <anchor id=a563.14>Dróttenn sýnde þer í nótt.&rsquo; Síðan lofoðo þeir báðer Dróttenn <anchor id=a563.15>Jesum Christum.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p>&ast;    &ast;    &ast;    &ast;    &ast;    &ast;<note place=apparatus id=an563.3><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>&ast;&ast;&ast;]</ab> an inserted § (ch. 20 of the old edition) is a gloss, containing repetitions.</note>



<p n=14.1><anchor id=a563.16><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> En es sú tíð vas komenn es Almáttegr Goð vilde eilíf&shy;lega <anchor id=a563.17>&aolig;mbona enom helga Ioane byscope þat starf <anchor id=a563.18>ok erviðe með miklom meinlætom, es hann hafðe fyrer Goðs saker <anchor id=a563.19>boret, þá tók enn helge Ioan byscop sótt; ok með þeirre s&aolig;mo sótt <anchor id=a563.20>leið hann af þesso lífe. Sótten vas ecke á-k&aolig;f, ok mátte hann efter<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a563.21>því &aolig;llom hlutom skipa ok hugsa, sem hann vilde. Ok es hann lá <anchor id=a563.22>í þesse sótt, ok vas enn eige oliaðr, þá kom til hans einn af lære-sveinom <anchor id=a564.1><pb id=pb564 n=564><note place=margin>[175: 22.]</note>(hans) rítare góðr ok vin-sæll maðr, prestr at vígslo; hann <anchor id=a564.2>hét Þórvarðr, ok vas kallaðr Knappe or Knappa-dal: hann hafðe <anchor id=a564.3>með ser bóc es hann hafðe ritat ok g&oelig;rva preste einom, þeim es <anchor id=a564.4>þaðan vas langt í braut, ok hafðe sá beðet hann miok til at g&oelig;ra <anchor id=a564.5>bócena; ok h&aolig;fðo þeir á þat sæzc sín á miðlom, at byscop skylde<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a564.6>virða bócena, ok skylde prestrenn efter því kaupa. Byscop varð <anchor id=a564.7>fegenn prestenom, ok mælte við hann blíðlega: &lsquo;Gack at mer, <anchor id=a564.8>son mínn, ok kyss f&aolig;ðor þínn friðar-koss, áðr an ek &aolig;ndomc, sem <anchor id=a564.9>aðrer br&oeacute;ðr þíner.&rsquo; Síðan geck prestrenn at hónom, ok kyste <anchor id=a564.10>hann. Efter þat sýner hann hónom bócena, ok seger, á hvat þeir<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a564.11>h&aolig;fðo sæzt um verðet sín í miðlom; ok bað hann virða bócena. <anchor id=a564.12>En byscop hyggr at bócenne, ok lofaðe miok ok mælte síðan: <anchor id=a564.13>&lsquo;Góð es þesse bóc, ok vel ritoð; en eige mon hónom verða auðet <anchor id=a564.14>bócarennar; annarr nockorr man hennar nióta skolo.&rsquo; Prestrenn <anchor id=a564.15>svarar: &lsquo;Fyrer hví, faðer? legg þú á verðet, en hann mun giarna<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a564.16>kaupa efter því; þvi at hann bað mik miok, at ek skylda hónom <anchor id=a564.17>slíka bóc g&oelig;ra.&rsquo; Byscop svarar: &lsquo;Þat má ek g&oelig;ra,&rsquo; seger hann, <anchor id=a564.18>&lsquo;ef þú vill, at virða bócena: an eige þarf þess, fyrer því, at sá enn <anchor id=a564.19>same prestr, es þú hefer bócena ætlað, es nú andaðr.&rsquo; Þess <anchor id=a564.20>vas í miðlom n&oelig;ckor hríð, ok þess es spurðesc and-lát þess<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a564.21>ens sama prestz, ok hafðe hann þá andaðr veret, es byscop sagðe <anchor id=a564.22>and-lát hans. Ollom m&aolig;nnom þótte mikels um vert, es enn heilage <anchor id=a564.23>Ioan byscop mátte slíka hlute vita, þar es hann vas þesso hverge <anchor id=a564.24>í n&aoacute;nd.

<p n=14.2><anchor id=a564.25><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Nú tók þó miok at líða at enom helga Ioane byscope; en þó<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a565.1><pb id=pb565 n=565><note place=margin>[176: 22.]</note>at m&aoacute;ttrenn þyrre miok, þá helt hann þó iamnan síno b&oeacute;na-halde <anchor id=a565.2>meðan hann mátte mæle<note place=apparatus id=an565.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>meðan ... mæle]</ab> add. C.</note>. Efter þat let hann olea sik, ok vóro þar <anchor id=a565.3>við stadder aller þeir lærðer menn sem á staðnom vóro, ok aðrer <anchor id=a565.4>hans hugðo-menn. Hann hafðe þá áðr þannog til skipat, sem <anchor id=a565.5>hónom þótte vænlegazt. Efter þat lét hann gefa ser <hi lang=la>corpus Domini</hi>;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a565.6>ok es hann hafðe því bergt, þá s&oelig;ng hann fyrst <hi lang=la>communio</hi> þessa; <anchor id=a565.7><hi lang=la>Refecti, domine, pane celesti ad vitam quesumus nutriamur eternam</hi>. <anchor id=a565.8>Efter þat hóf hann upp psalm þenna: <hi lang=la>Benedicam dominum in omni <anchor id=a565.9>tempore; semper laus ejus in ore meo</hi>. Þesse orð þýðasc svá: &lsquo;Lofa <anchor id=a565.10>man-ek Dróttenn á hverre tíð, ok iafnan sé lof hans í munne mínom.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a565.11>Ok þá es hann hafðe þenna psalm í munne, ok enn hr&oelig;rðesc tungan <anchor id=a565.12>til þessa enna heilogo orða, þá skilðesc hans en heilaga &aolig;nd við <anchor id=a565.13>sínn líkama, ok vas þá boren af Goðs englom til þeirra fagnaða, es <anchor id=a565.14>henne vóro fyrer-búner af Alm&aoacute;tkom Goðe; ok man hann þar lofa <anchor id=a565.15>Almátkan Goð at eilífo með &aolig;ðrom helgom m&aolig;nnom, svá sem hann<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a565.16>hafðe fyrer heiteð í psalmenom, þeim es hann s&oelig;ng síðast.

<p n=14.3><anchor id=a565.17><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> En enn heilage Ioan byscop leið af heime þessom til eilífra <anchor id=a565.18>fagnaða á Laugar-dege, ix <hi lang=la>kal. Maii</hi>. Þá vas liðet frá Burð Christi <anchor id=a565.19><hi rend=sc>MC</hi> ok xiiij<note place=apparatus id=an565.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>xiiij]</ab> B and C; xxi, Cd.</note> vetr. Hann vas vígðr til byscop þá es hann hafðe <anchor id=a565.20>fióra vetr ens sétta tegar; en hann sat í byscopsdóme sínom xv<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a565.21>vetr. Ok þá es hann hafðe allz lifat í þessom heime lx vetra ok ix <anchor id=a565.22>vetr, þá andaðesc hann í góðre elle&mdash;þat vas ok á d&aolig;gom Calixti <anchor id=a565.23>papa es annarr vas með því nafne, á d&aolig;gom Noregs konunga, Ey&shy;steins <anchor id=a566.1><pb id=pb566 n=566><note place=margin>[176: 22.]</note>ok Sigurðar; en þá vas andaðr Óláfr konungr, bróðer þeirra. <anchor id=a566.2>Þá vas byscop í Scála-holte Þorlákr byscop Rúnolfs son.

<p n=14.4><anchor id=a566.3><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Lærðer menn þeir sem við vóro stadder, bioggo um lík ens <anchor id=a566.4>heilaga Ioans byscops vel ok r&oeacute;kilega<note place=apparatus id=an566.1><p><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>r&oeacute;kilega]</ab> en er kisto skylde gera at líkeno, þá var at þeirre smíð klerkr sá er Brandr hét, ok var Bergþórs son: hann skeindezt....

<p lang=en-UK>But when the coffin was made for the body, it was a clerk named Brand who was the son of Bergthor that was to do the work. He cut himself deeply in the hand so that his finger was nearly off, and after that he had it bound in a linen [bandage], for it bled much, as it was like to do, but yet he would not give up the work till the coffin was finished. After that he arrayed the bishop&apos;s body along with other clerks and toiled thereat with great care. And three nights later his hand was unbound, and the sore was then healed, and men could see where the wound had been as it were a red thread left, and all praised God that saw this token.</note>. Ok es þar vas komet es <anchor id=a566.5>líket vas prýtt ok búet til graftar, ok sungenn lík-s&oelig;ngr framan til<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a566.6>þess es út skylde bera, þá gengo til af lærðom m&aolig;nnom þeir es <anchor id=a566.7>bera skyldo, ok tóko under barnarnar, ok vildo upp hefja. Þá brá <anchor id=a566.8>því við, es &aolig;llom m&aolig;nnom þótte mikels um vert, þeir es við vóro: <anchor id=a566.9>líket varð svá þungt, at þeir m&aoacute;tto &oelig;ngan veg hr&oeacute;ra es til vóro <anchor id=a566.10>setter út at bera. Þetta feck &aolig;llom mikellar á-hyggjo, ok r&oeacute;ddo<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a566.11>sín á miðlom hverjo gegna m&oelig;nde. Þá tekr til orða vel ok hygge&shy;lega <anchor id=a566.12>einn af clerkom ok seger svá: &lsquo;Várrar van-hyggjo mon at <anchor id=a566.13>gialda um þenna at-burð, ok mono vér hafa g&oelig;rt nockorn hlut <anchor id=a566.14>ó-virðolega í várre þionosto við byscop várn: leiteð nú efter vand&shy;lega, <anchor id=a566.15>hvárt hann hafe þá hlute alla í skrúðeno sem h&oeacute;fa ok til<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a566.16>heyra hans vígslo.&rsquo; Þá vas um leitað, ok rannsakaðesc svá til, at <anchor id=a566.17>þeir h&aolig;fðo eige dreget á h&aolig;nd enom heilaga Ioane byscope fingr-goll <anchor id=a566.18>hans, ok lá þat þar á pallenom<note place=apparatus id=an566.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ok lá ... pall.]</ab> add. C.</note>. Þeir tóko þá gollet ok drógo <anchor id=a567.1><pb id=pb567 n=567><note place=margin>[177: 22.]</note>á h&aolig;nd hónom; ok efter þat gengo til ener s&aolig;mo menn sem fyrr, <anchor id=a567.2>ok tóko þá upp líket léttlega ok b&aoacute;ro til graftar.

<p n=14.5><anchor id=a567.3><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Líkame ens heilaga Ioans byscops var iarðaðr útan kirkjo <anchor id=a567.4>fyrer sunnan s&oelig;ng-húset [fyrer útan kirkjo til austrs nær s&aolig;nghús-veggenom <anchor id=a567.5>syðra]<note place=apparatus id=an567.1><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>fyrer útan ... syðra]</ab> add. B.</note>, ok g&oelig;rt yfer hválf. Þar l&aoacute;go bein hans lxxx vetr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a567.6>ok nockoro minnr, þar til es Goð birte hans dýrð með f&aolig;grom <anchor id=a567.7>iartegnom, ok heilagr dómr hans vas or i&aolig;rðo tekenn. Þá lét <anchor id=a567.8>virðolegr herra Brandr byscop taka upp helgan dómenn ok f&oeacute;ra í <anchor id=a567.9>kirkjo inn, ok búa um virðolega með mikelle dýrð til lofs órom <anchor id=a567.10>Dróttne Jesu Christo.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p><anchor id=a567.11>Sá láte ser sóma, fyr verðleika þessa síns heilaga ást-vinar ok <anchor id=a567.12>b&oeacute;ner, at firra oss vandræðom ok háskasamlegom hlutom: en þá <anchor id=a567.13>es ver líðom af þessom heime, sam-tenge hann órar sálor sínom <anchor id=a567.14>v&aolig;lðom m&aolig;nnom. Þetta veite oss Almáttegr Goð<note place=apparatus id=an567.2><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Þetta veite ...]</ab> add. C.</note>, sá es lifer ok <anchor id=a567.15>ríker einn Goð í Þrenningo, <hi lang=la>per omnia secula seculorum</hi>. <hi>Amen.</hi><ab type=lineNum>15</ab>


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<!-- BEGIN OF TRANSLATED TEXT OF S.JOHN OF HOLAR&apos;S LIFE. -->


<pb id=pb535a n=535>
<div2 id=en.holar rend="display(none)" lang=en-UK>
<p><hi rend=sc>The Life of S. John the Bishop.</hi>


<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> We begin the story or record of the holy bishop John in the days when Harold Sigurd&apos;s son was ruling Norway, and there were passed from the fall of king Olaf the Saint two-and-twenty winters. In that time was the holy bishop John born in a homestead in Fleet&apos;s-lithe that is called Broad-bowster. His father was named Og-mund. The father of Og-mund was named Thor-kel, and was the son of <pb id=pb536a n=536>As-gar Cneif. The mother of bishop John was named Thor-gerd. She was the daughter of Egil the son of Hall o&apos; Side, who was the man who had the fortune to be the first of the chiefs of the East-frith-men&apos;s Quarter to take baptism and the true faith. Thor-gerd&apos;s mother was named Thor-laug. [She was] the daughter of Thor-wald o&apos; Ridge.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> The holy bishop John grew up at home with his father and mother at Broad-bowster until he was five winters old, and then there came about great tidings and ones which all the people of this land were greatly rejoiced at&mdash;<hi>to wit</hi>, the consecration as bishop of Is-laf, the son of Gizor the White, and daughter&apos;s son of Thor-odd gode, according to the prayer of the whole people of this country. He was hallowed bishop by Adalbert, archbishop of Bremen in Saxland [Saxony], in the days of Leo, the ninth pope of that name. Is-laf was taught in Saxland in the town that is called Herfurd [Herford]. He was the first consecrated to be bishop of this country that has had his see here. Many bishops had come into this country aforetime which had not been consecrated to be bishops of this country; some were here very many winters, and some a short while. Is-laf was in Norway the next winter after he was consecrated bishop, and afterwards he went to Iceland, and came out hither the next summer after the great famine [1057], and set up his see and his home in his own paternal heritage at Scal-holt. [Cp. <hi>Hungrv.</hi> ch. <hi rend=bold>1</hi>. 3, 4.]

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> It was early the prediction of wise folk what a man he would come to be, this holy bishop John, for wherever he went men were impressed when they looked in his countenance.

<pb id=pb537a n=537><p n=1.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> There was a man named Godwine, and he was called Godwine the Good, and men believe that he was so indeed. He saw the holy bishop John when he was yet a child, and spake of him in these words, &lsquo;That is a fair child, and he hath in him a great appearance of holiness.&rsquo; And now it hath come to pass according to the saw, &lsquo;What wise men say will come to pass.&rsquo;


<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> When John was yet a child his father and mother broke up housekeeping and went abroad together. They came to Denmark and went to king Swein, and the king received them worshipfully, and Thor-gerd was made to sit by the queen herself, Est-rith, the mother of king Swein. Thor-gerd had her son the holy [bishop] John at the table with her, and when many kinds of precious dainties with good drink came to the king&apos;s table, then it happened with the boy John, as is ever the way with children, that he stretched out his hands to the things he wished to have. But his mother would have chidden him, and smote his hands. But when queen Est-rith saw this, she spake to Thor-gerd, &lsquo;Not so, not so, Thor-gerd mine; do not strike those hands, for they are bishop&apos;s hands.&rsquo; Now from such an occurrence it may be seen, as we have said before, what wise folk thought of him, and they foresaw what afterwards came to pass, by God&apos;s providence, with respect to the holy bishop John.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> It is also needful to put down what the holy king Olaf said to Thor-gerd, mother of the holy bishop John. She was then eight winters <pb id=pb538a n=538>old when she went to Norway with her father and mother. Egil went into the service of the holy king Olaf, and was well treated there, as were all other worshipful men of Iceland that came thither. But when it drew on to Yule, Egil began to be sad. The king espied it, and asked him what was the matter. Egil said it was naught; but when the king enquired into it, then Egil told him that if there were anything amiss it was rather this, that Thor-laug his wife would not be treated as honourably as himself when they held the glorious feast that was then close at hand. The king said that he would put this to rights, and asked her to spend Yule with him, and her daughter also. And on Yule evening, when they were walking up the hall with queen Est-rith, and they were given seats for them close to the queen, the king espied the maid, and afterwards said to Egil her father, &lsquo;This daughter of thine seems to me a fair maid and of goodly bearing, and I can tell thee that she will be a lucky lady, and it shall be the noblest family in Iceland that shall spring from her.&rsquo; And now that hath fairly come to pass as was to be looked for indeed, which the holy man spake, and hath been shown forth in this holy man bishop John her son, for he indeed is truly noble, that was honoured by the choice of many men and glorified with the office of bishop while he lived in this world, and now he shineth by fair miracles, and hath become of great help to all them that seek his intercession with Almighty God.


<pb id=pb539a n=539><p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> When the father and mother of John had been abroad such while as they thought good, they went back to Iceland again, and settled down in their homestead at Broad-bowster. And when the holy [bishop] John was grown to be a big boy, his father put him to school to bishop Is-laf. And he grew up in his charge, and soon grew ripe in holy learning and good manners, for in bishop Is-laf he had the best means of getting both.

<p n=3.2>2&ndash;3. [See Hungrv. <hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 7 b, and 2.] Hall of Hawk-dale fostered Tait. Tait, bishop Is-laf&apos;s son, fostered and taught many clerks. Two of his disciples afterwards became bishops, viz. bishop Thor-lac the first, and bishop Beorn of Holar.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Bishop Is-laf soon saw how well his fosterling John was getting on with his learning and the other good things which he taught him with fair ensamples and goodly conversation. Then he began to cherish him greatly, and hold him of much account in many ways, and others soon did the same after his example.

<p n=3.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> The holy [bishop] John was a big man of growth, the most goodly and handsome of men, the best-eyed of any man, light of hair, and strong of body, and the best-favoured in his whole carriage; but no matter how well-favoured he was in all men&apos;s sight in his bearing, yet he was not a whit less remarked for the gentleness and lowliness of his speech to all <pb id=pb540a n=540>people. And so by God&apos;s help he brought it about that he became dear both to God and to good men.

<p n=3.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Now it hath become needful to say somewhat of this also, in what account the holy bishop John held his foster-father bishop Is-laf, for as men of wisdom and knowledge say, it was ever in bishop John&apos;s mouth when he happened to be by when men were talking among themselves of the man whom they held the best. &lsquo;Bishop Is-laf, my foster-father,&rsquo; he would say, &lsquo;was the handsomest of all men, the cleverest of all men, the best of all men.&rsquo; Then they that had been talking before would answer the bishop, &lsquo;Who was speaking, my lord, of bishop Is-laf?&rsquo; And the holy bishop John would answer, &lsquo;I must needs speak of him whenever I hear a good man spoken of.&rsquo; Now this was a fair testimony to bishop Is-laf that a holy man should speak so of him, and a great honour to bishop John that such a man should have fostered him.

<p n=3.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> This thing is also specially spoken of which the holy bishop John had had above all other men&mdash;to wit, that he was better voiced than any man, and hereof shall be some token spoken of later in this history, that wise men have held that it was so.


<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> The holy bishop John was minded to go abroad, and he was then a deacon in orders, and well-nigh a full-grown man, and he yearned to see the ways of good men, and to increase his learning both for his own profit and for that of many others, as was afterwards proven. So he went first to Norway, and thence to Denmark, and never stayed on <pb id=pb541a n=541>his way till he went south and sought the holy apostle Peter in his own place, and afterwards he turned back thence and came to Denmark on the day of the Lord&apos;s Passion. And king Swein was still alive, and he sought to him to see him.

<p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And when he was come to the place where the king was, it was then told him that the king was at mass. But the priest that was to sing the mass began to read the Passion as the holy John came into the church. But he read the lesson so slowly and with such difficulty that they that stood by thought it heavy and wearisome to hear. But when the holy John found that the priest was well-nigh become a laughing-stock to men, then he laid a stole over his shoulders, and walked up to the priest and took the book out of his hand in lowly fashion, and read the Passion so nobly and clearly that all they that stood by marvelled. And when the service was over the king sent after him, and asked him to him, and bade him stay a long while with him, and paid him so great honour that he put him next himself, and was pleased that he should stay with him as long as he would, and indeed he stayed with him a good while.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> During the time while the holy John was with king Swein he was honoured by God with noble forebodings, and one day when he came to the king&apos;s table, he himself told the king what he had seen in a dream. &lsquo;Methought in the night that I was standing in a certain cathedral of marvellous splendour, and in the choir of the church, as it were in the <pb id=pb542a n=542>bishop&apos;s seat, I saw our Lord Jesus Christ sitting, and on a foot-stool at His feet I saw the holy king David sitting, and smiting his harp with most noble skill and most fair music; and indeed I think, my lord, that there hath remained in my mind somewhat of that fair music that he made. Now do thou, my lord, let them bring me a harp, and I will try before thee if I can remember somewhat of the music he made.&rsquo; Then the king bade them bring a harp and give it to John, and he took the harp and tuned it, and smote it with so great skill that the king himself and all they that stood by cried out how well he played. All to whom this was told thought this thing to be of great import, and all they praised Almighty God that deigneth to manifest the glory of His saints.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Nor can this be left out how great succour the Icelanders got both abroad and at home from the holy bishop John. We will tell this first, how he found out and brought back from abroad hither along with him Sæ-mund Sigfusson, the man that of all others hath been of the greatest profit to God&apos;s Church in this country, when he had been away so long that there were no news at all of him. But the holy John got news of him, and brought him back with him from the south, and they both journeyed together from the south out hither to their kinsfolk and their foster-land.

<p n=4.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> When the holy John was abroad this time king Magnus, the son of Olaf [the Quiet], the son of Harold Sigurdsson, was ruling over Norway, <pb id=pb543a n=543>and when John came north into Thrond-ham the king was there. At that time there were in Norway many Icelanders, and Tait the son of bishop Gizor was there then. And it came to pass that a man of Iceland, whose name was Gisl [Illuge&apos;s son the poet], slew a man, and the man that was slain was a house-carl of king Magnus. But Gisl was driven to this rash deed because he had to avenge his father, and the man whom Gisl slew was named Giaf-wald [Gieb-wald]; he had been at the slaying of Illuge, Gisl&apos;s father. And soon after the slaying Gisl was taken and fettered by the king&apos;s men. But when the Icelanders heard of it, straightway they all went together to the house wherein Gisl was, Tait being the leader of their company, and hewed off his fetters and took him away with them. But at the news thereof the king let call a Moot, and he was exceeding wrath, and it looked as if the matter would turn out very badly [for the Icelanders]. At this Moot no Icelanders were allowed to plead save holy John. The king gave him leave to speak, and he pleaded in a long and very fine speech, and it was of such influence that the king&apos;s wrath was abated, so that they got quarter and peace that before were well-nigh doomed to death [1096&ndash;7].


<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> After this there came out hither to Iceland John and Sæ-mund, and settled down each on his father&apos;s heritage, John at Broad-bowster, and Sæ-mund at Ord, and there they both dwelt a very long while, and there was brotherly love and holy communion between them, and they were like unto one another in many good things. They were also near <pb id=pb544a n=544>of a like age, as far as we can guess, but John was two winters the elder. They both adorned the holy churches which they had to keep in many ways, serving them humbly in their priesthood and increasing their rights greatly with respect to provision of clerks, so that they should have each church served more often than it had been before. They might also rightly be called Pillars of the Church, for they upheld her fairly in their holy teaching, and many other goodly endowments which went forth from them upon all them that were near them, or that would hearken to or accept their wholesome admonitions.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Now the holy John was married and had two wives, and the first one lived but a short while, and by neither had he any children that grew up out of childhood, or that we have heard tell of.


<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1, 2.</ab> [See Hungrv. 1. 8; Libellus, 9. 8; 10. 3.]

<pb id=pb545a n=545><p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> When Almighty God was minded to raise up His servant the holy John to an higher degree of clerkly honour than he was in before, the North-landers prayed bishop Gizor that he would set up a bishop&apos;s see in the North-landers Quarter, because they said they were so far off, and their Quarter was the most thickly inhabited and the greatest, wherefore they needed most the visitations of the bishop, but could most seldom get them. Bishop Gizor laid this matter before the men of most understanding, and they all agreed together that it would be a good thing to grant them their prayer, and chiefly because they thought it would be a great support to the Church of God, and that it would be less likely that the land should be long bishopless if there were two bishops. Whereupon it was now settled in such wise that bishop Gizor gave up more than a fourth part of his bishopric, to the end that there should be a bishop&apos;s see in the North-landers Quarter, as the North-landers had prayed. And to this office and honour and bishopric over the North-landers Quarter and the North-landers, bishop Gizor chose priest John Og-mund&apos;s son, with the consent of all clerks and laymen in the North-landers Quarter. And although the holy John at first made many excuses for not taking the office by reason of his humility, yet at the last he gave way at the prayer of bishop Gizor, and consented to go abroad and take bishop&apos;s orders if God would have it so.


<p n=7.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>7.</hi> 1.</ab> Now after this there were many meetings held, and it was settled at the end that the see of the bishop of the North-landers should be set north in Sheltie-dale, at the homestead that is called Holar [the knolls]. There had dwelt a worthy priest who was called Illoge <pb id=pb546a n=546>[<hi>Latinised</hi> Hilarius], and was the son of Beorn. He was the only one of the men of worship of the North-landers Quarter to rise up from the heritage of his fathers for God&apos;s sake and the needs of Holy Church, because there had before been long shufflings between the chiefs as to which of them should forsake his father&apos;s heritage and his home, and there was none of them ready so to do save this man only. And it is easy for all men to see that he did this for God&apos;s sake, and he might well hope for that which must have come to pass, that God would give him a fair mansion in everlasting bliss, which may of right be called the heritage of good men. [Now this same Hilarius afterwards went to Broad-bowster in West-hope, and there his body resteth, but his soul is with God in everlasting joy.]

<p n=7.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And this summer the bishop-elect took ship with the following that was appointed for him and moneys, and he took with him a letter and seal of bishop Gizor which bore witness to his errand. And when they were ready they put to sea, and there is nought told of their journey till they got to Denmark, and they had a good voyage. But John the holy bishop-elect forthwith sought the archbishop Auzor, and came to the place where the archbishop was, and [it was] rather late in the day.

<p n=7.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> The archbishop was at church at evensong, and when John the holy bishop-elect got to church evensong was well-nigh over. He took his place outside the choir, and began to sing evensong with his clerks. The archbishop had forbidden all his clerks, old and young alike, to look out <pb id=pb547a n=547>of the choir while the hours were being sung, and he set a penalty to be taken if this his command were broken. But as soon as the archbishop heard the chanting of the holy John, he looked out down the church trying to see who the man was that had such a voice. But when evensong was over, the archbishop&apos;s clerks said to him, &lsquo;How now, my lord bishop, have ye not yourself broken the rules ye made?&rsquo; The archbishop answered, &lsquo;I confess that it is true as ye say, but yet I have not done it for nought, for a voice was borne into my ears such as I have never heard before, and it may rather be likened to the voice of an angel than of a man.&rsquo; Whereby it may be noted, as we have said before in this story, how far the voice of the holy John was before that of most men, according to the judgment of the wise. But when John had finished his evensong, then he went to see the archbishop, and he received him worshipfully, and asked him and his following to stay with him. And when the holy John had been a short while with the archbishop, he set forth his errand to the archbishop, and showed him the letter and seal of bishop Gizor; and when they had considered the matter for certain days with other clerks with whom the bishop wished to consider the matter, and when the matter was thoroughly overhauled, then the archbishop spoke to the bishop-elect: &lsquo;I perceive very well, my very dear brother, that thou hast almost all the qualities that fit thee for a bishop; moreover I believe that that people will be happy which may <pb id=pb548a n=548>have such a bishop over them. But by reason of one thing which thou hast told me, that thou hast had two wives, I dare not consecrate thee without the leave of the pope and his own cognizance thereof. Wherefore this is our counsel herein, that thou go as quickly as may be to see the pope, and we will write thee a letter under our seal and acquaint the pope with thy case. And if it go so as we would hope, that he give thee leave to take consecration [as bishop], and us leave to bestow it, then do thou come back to me as quickly as may be, and I will then joyfully accomplish thine errand for thee.&rsquo;

<p n=7.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> After that John the holy bishop-elect went to the city of Rome, and when he was come there his suit was well received by the pope. When John came south the holy Paschalis [Pascal], second of that name, was pope. The holy John declared all his errand to the pope, and showed him withal the archbishop&apos;s letter and seal which acquainted the pope with all the conditions of his case, and when the pope had seen the writing he graciously granted the humble prayer that was made to him, and directed the holy bishop-elect to go and see archbishop Auzor, and wrote to him under his seal, and gave him leave to consecrate the holy John bishop.

<p n=7.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> And when John had taken the pope&apos;s blessing, he went on his way back and came with his following to see archbishop Auzor. And when he was aware by the pope&apos;s letter, which the holy John brought from his meeting with the pope, that he was given full freedom to consecrate him, then the archbishop was wonderfully glad, and thanked Almighty God <pb id=pb549a n=549>that it should have been granted him to fulfil the errand of the holy John, according to the wish of the people. And now he abode with the archbishop till the time when he should think fit to consecrate him. After this the archbishop calleth together the clerks that were bound to be present at that service, and when all was prepared then he consecrateth the holy John bishop on the Lord&apos;s-day two nights before the mass of the two apostles Philip and James, that is the third of the kalends of May [April 29, 1106]. After the holy John was consecrated he dwelt with the archbishop, and received of him many helpsome counsels profitable both to himself and to the people over whom he was set.

<p n=7.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> The holy John was consecrated bishop, as hath been told, when he was four-and-fifty years old. That was in the days of pope Pascal, and in the days of Ey-stan and Sig-urd, kings of Norway. And at that day bishop Gizor had governed God&apos;s Church in Iceland as long as bishop Is-laf his father, and that was four-and-twenty winters.


<p n=8.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>8.</hi> 1.</ab> Bishop John went out to Iceland the next summer after he was consecrated, and had a good voyage, and soon after they had made land the news of his arrival was known, and all good men were joyful thereat, and forthwith there came together crowds to meet him. He received every man&apos;s suit with gentleness, and showed in every way that <pb id=pb550a n=550>he had not forgotten the holy humility which was in him before he was consecrated bishop, but rather that he had increased therein with all other good qualities, now that more was required of him since he had been so greatly raised by Almighty God to much honour.

<p n=8.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And as soon as the holy John was ready to leave the ship he went home to his see at Holar, and straightway began to govern well and fairly Almighty God&apos;s Church which he was set over, and that winter he stayed at home at his seat. But in the summer he rode to the All-moot, and there he and bishop Gizor met with much joy, and then bishop Gizor apprized the people how much good men had to thank God for in the joyful tidings that had now come about that there were two bishops in the country, which thing had never been before since Christendom came into the land. The bishops talked over many things together that were profitable, and put together with other clerks [help] the rules which they should set over them that were under their care.

<p n=8.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> That summer bishop John began his visitation of his diocese, and set himself to govern God&apos;s Christendom with mighty governing; he chastised evil men with the power that was given him on God&apos;s behalf, and strengthened good men and them of right conversation in many good ways.



<p n=9.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>9.</hi> 1.</ab> Now the holy bishop John had sat but a short time at his bishopstead at Holar, before he had the church that was there taken down. This church had been made next after that which Oxe Sholto&apos;s son had had built [c. 1030]. Men think that this church which Oxe <pb id=pb551a n=551>had made was the biggest church under wooden shingles in all Iceland; and he [Oxe] laid out much means on this church, and had it well fitted within and beautifully, and covered it all with lead. But this church was all burnt with all its vestments by the secret judgment of God. But the holy bishop John had a great and worshipful church built at Holar, which standeth there to-day, although it has been both covered and many other repairs made since [his day]. And the holy bishop John spared nought in the building of this church, that God&apos;s glory might be more than before there, and this house [of his] might be fairly built and adorned.

<p n=9.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> He chose the man for the church building that was then thought to be the most skilful. His name was Thor-odd, and he was the son of Gamle, and it was so that both the holy John spared not to pay him great and good wages, and he did his work well and honestly. It is told of this man that he was so quick at learning that, when he was at his work, he listened to the priestlings being taught the accomplishment which is called <hi>grammatica</hi>, and it stuck so well in his ears, by reason of his great quickness in learning and attention <hi>or</hi> application, that he became the most accomplished man in this kind of learning.



<p n=10.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>10.</hi> 1.</ab> When John had been a short while bishop, he had a school set up at home there at the bishopstead, west of the church door, and had it well and beautifully built [and the mark of the houses is still to be seen]. And to this end, to govern the school and teach them <pb id=pb552a n=552>that should be set there, he chose him a man out of Gotland that was the best and quickest clerk: he was called Gisle, and was the son of Finne. He paid him a great wage, both to teach the priestlings and to give such support to holy Christendom along with the bishop himself as he could manage in his teachings and addresses. And ever when he was preaching before the people, he had a book lying before him, and took therefrom what he spoke to the people, and he did this most out of prudence and humility, because as he was young in years those that listened might lay more store by it, when they saw that he took what he taught out of holy books and not out of his own natural knowledge <hi>or</hi> breast-wit. And yet so much advantage followed his teachings that the men that listened thereto were much moved, and made great and good changes [in their lives] by his advice. And that which he taught in his words he showed forth also in his works. His teachings were lenient and light to bear to all good, and the wise thought them seemly and interesting, and to the evil they became a great terror and a true chastisement.

<p n=10.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> On all the high feasts there was a great multitude there, for it was then the great business for many men, first to hear the hours, so fairly were they performed there, and also [to hear] the ordinances of the bishop and his precious teachings which were so choice to hear, whether they were spoken by the bishop himself or by this man that hath just now been spoken of.



<p n=11.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>11.</hi> 1.</ab> But a short while had the holy John been bishop before he began to turn men&apos;s ways and habits much into another level than that <pb id=pb553a n=553>they had been in before. He became full of chastisement to men of ill-life, but he was blithe and gentle to all good men, and showed in himself that all which he taught in his words he fulfilled in his work. It appeared to wise men that knew his ways that he was seldom unmindful of that which the Lord spake to His disciples, <hi lang=la>Luceat lux vestra</hi> ... [<xref url="bib:mt 5:16">Math. v. 16</xref>]. These words go thus: &lsquo;Let your light shine before men, so that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.&rsquo;

<p n=11.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And the holy bishop John strongly enjoined that which hath been kept since, that men should come to hours on holidays and other set days, and he bade the priests to repeat oftentimes those things which they needed to know. He bade men keep a daily custom, as beseems Christian men, that is to go every day, late or early, to a cross or church, and there mindfully to put up one&apos;s prayers. He bade them to have each in his lodging the mark of the holy cross as a safeguard to himself, and as soon as a man woke he was to sign himself and sing first <hi lang=la>Credo in Deum</hi> [the creed], and thus speak his belief in Almighty God, and walk all day after armed with the mark of the holy cross, with which he marked himself as soon as he woke, and never to take sleep or meat or drink without signing himself beforehand. He bade every man to learn <hi lang=la>Pater Noster</hi> and <hi lang=la>Credo in Deum</hi>, and Mary&apos;s Verse [<hi lang=la>Ave Maria</hi>], and <pb id=pb554a n=554>remember his hours seven times a day, according as David the prophet saith, <hi lang=la>Septies in die laudem tibi dixi, Domine Deus meus</hi> [<xref url="bib:ps 119:164">Ps. cxix. 164</xref>], that is to be interpreted in Northern [speech]&mdash;&lsquo;Seven times a day I have spoken praise to thee, O Lord my God,&rsquo; and dutifully sing every evening ere he slept <hi lang=la>Credo in Deum</hi> and <hi lang=la>Pater Noster</hi>. And that we may end this discourse in few words, he got the ways of the people under him so ordered within a short space by God&apos;s help, that holy Christendom hath never stood in such blossom in the North-landers Quarter, neither before nor since as it stood then, when the people were so blessed in having such a bishop&apos;s government over them.

<p n=11.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Moreover he forbade altogether all evil customs and heathendom and sacrifices, magic and charms, and stood up against them with all his might, for it was not altogether done away with while Christendom was young.

<p>He also forbade all omens, which the men of old [heathens] had been wont to take from the coming of the moon and [observance of] days, and dedicating days to heathen men or gods&mdash;as it is when they are called Tew&apos;s-day, Woden&apos;s-day, or Thor&apos;s, and so of all the weekdays; but he bade men to keep the reckoning which the holy fathers have set in the scriptures, and call them the Second Day of the week, and the Third Day, and so on&mdash;and all other things beside, which he thought sprung from ill roots.

<p n=11.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> There was a play men used much, which was unseemly, wherein a man must recite to a woman, and a woman to a man, verses foul and light <pb id=pb555a n=555>and not fit to listen to, and this he had abolished and altogether forbade it to be done. Love-poems and songs he would not hear recited or have recited, but he could not get rid of them altogether.

<p>[Double text, B.] This play was dear to men before the holy John was bishop, wherein a man would recite to a woman in the dance effeminate and satirical poems, and a woman to a man love-verses. This play he had abolished and strongly forbade it.

<p n=11.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> It is told that he came to hear that Clong Thor-stan&apos;s son (he that was afterwards bishop in Scal-holt), when he was a priestling and young in years, was reading a book that is called <hi lang=la>Ovidius, De Arte</hi> [<hi lang=la>Amatoriâ</hi>]. In this book there is much love-poetry, and he forbade him to read this kind of book, saying that it was heavy work enough for every man to keep himself from fleshly lust and unlawful love, even if he did not irritate his mind with any poetry [Latin] or poems [vernacular] of this kind.

<p n=11.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> He was also diligent in pursuing men&apos;s evil ways, and he went about hourly to do this, that well-nigh no man came to see him but he managed in some way to better his ways by reason of his godly love, and the pains he took to help every man. And when he set men hard <pb id=pb556a n=556>penance by reason of great offences, and they underwent them well and humbly, it was not long before his holy breast that the Holy Ghost had chosen for His dwelling was pained by their afflictions, and he would lighten their penance in some way. And those men whom he had interdicted by reason of his godly love and zeal, those same he would restore mercifully when they had forsaken their faults. And he that loved all the people under him as his brothers and sons, did not batten on <hi>or</hi> profit by any of their faults or distresses, but he rejoiced when it went well with them, and condoled over all that went otherwise. He was so kind-hearted that he could hardly bear to see or know that a man was in trouble, and so generous and open-handed with the poor, that his peer could scarce be found. He was a true father to all poor folk, he comforted the widows and the fatherless, and never came one in such distress to see him but he got comfort of some kind from his means. He was of such loving carriage to all men, that there was well-nigh no man that would oppose him, and that was more for the sake of the godly love that all men bore him than for bodily fear. And inasmuch as he crushed his own desire in manifold wise, and did God&apos;s will, if he found that it did not conform thereto by reason of bodily lust, therefore God repaid him at once then in yoking beneath him all the people under him in holy obedience. And the holy John lived his life according to divine ordinance and good men&apos;s judgment <hi>or</hi> example; he was at his prayers <pb id=pb557a n=557>night and day and fasted long, and mortified himself in many ways to the end that he might yield more profit to God than before out of those things that had been committed to his hand.



<p n=12.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>12.</hi> 1.</ab> And to this end that he might be more freer than before to keep the hours and ordinances, and to perform the other things by which God&apos;s Christendom <hi>or</hi> Church was most maintained, he chose him men to look after the [bishop]stead with him, that should overlook that which belonged to the stead along with that noble lady, whose name was Wal-dis, whom he had wedded before.

<p n=12.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> One of them was a worshipful priest, whose name was Heah-mund, Beorn&apos;s son; he was the grandfather of Hilda, nun and anchoress [as shall be told of later in this discourse]. Next to Heah-mund in the administration was the priest whose name was Healte, and he was a kinsman of the bishop. Of laymen there was one in the administration with them that was of noble family, his name was Orn, and he was the son of Thor-lac of Withe-mere. These men took chief care of what appertained to the stead, and appointed men their occupations, some to gathering to the stead all that was thought needful. Some were set to work, some to serve the poor (and the bishop was strict in this that this should be mercifully done), some to receive the guests, because at any feast <hi>or</hi> high-tide there would come to see the bishop a hundred or whiles two hundred men, and sometimes more, for the holy John moreover <pb id=pb558a n=558>had laid it down that he was not satisfied save every man in his hundred <hi>or</hi> diocese, that had the use of his feet, came to him at the least once in the twelve-months to visit the bishopstead at Holar. By reason of which there was such a multitude there on Maundy <hi>or</hi> Sheer-monday and Easter, that there were not less than four hundred [480] persons altogether, men and women. And although many of these men had provisions with them, there were many more that were at the bishop&apos;s cost, and were fulfilled of him both with spiritual and bodily food, and strengthened by his bishoply blessing they used to go away with joy to their own home.

<p n=12.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Many men of good conversation moved their homes to the bishopstead, and paid money of their own [for their keep], but some kept themselves, in order to hear the bishop&apos;s teachings and the performance of the hours. And they made their houses round about the churchyard.

<p n=12.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Holy bishop John took many men as disciples, and gave them good masters to teach them: Gisle Finsson, whom we spoke of before, to teach <hi>grammatica</hi>; and Rikine the priest a Frenchman, his chaplain and dear friend, to teach singing and verse-making, because he was a most learned man. There was well-nigh no house then, but there was some occupation going on within it that was profitable. It was the elder men&apos;s custom to teach the younger, and the younger were writing between their lessons. They were all of one mind and did not fall out, and never envied each other, and as soon as the hours were sung they <pb id=pb559a n=559>all came and performed their hours with great attention. There was nothing to be heard in the choir but fair song and holy prayer, for the elder men knew well how to behave, and the children were so chastised by their masters that they dared not behave naughtily.

<p n=12.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> These <hi>are the</hi> clerks <hi>that</hi> were bred up under the hands of bishop John: Clong, that was before-named, who was afterwards bishop in Scal-holt, and adorned the bishopstead by his making of books. And he was there through the days of bishop Cetil, and also of bishop Beorn, in friendship with all good men. There was taught also Wil-mund, the first abbot at Thing-ore, and abbot Hran [third of <corr sic="Thin-gore">Thing-ore</corr>]. There was taught also bishop Beorn, who was the third bishop of Holar. Many other worshipful clerks were bred up and taught there, although we do not name them.



<p n=13.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>13.</hi> 1.</ab> When the holy bishop John had been a short while set in his bishop-stool, the estate of men became very hard. There pressed upon them a great famine, and much [polar] ice and cold seasons, so that the earth was not green at the spring-moot [c. May 15]. And the holy bishop John went to the spring-moot that was at Thing-ore, and when he came there then he made a vow for good seasons, with the consent of all men, that they would raise a church and homestead and all contribute till the stead was established. After this vow the holy John put off his cloak and himself marked out the foundation wall for the church. And men&apos;s estate turned to the better straightway, so that that same <pb id=pb560a n=560>week all the ice was gone from which the famine had in great part come, so that none could be seen, and the earth began to grow green at once, and that same week there was sheep-pasture well-nigh sufficient.

<p n=13.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> This thing happened at the homestead at Holar, that there was a stall in the byre in which it would not do to tie up kine, for every one lay dead in the morning that had been tied up the evening before. It happened one harvest-tide that the holy bishop John went with his steward to settle which cattle were to be kept [through the winter] of them that should be stalled at the homestead; and when they had fixed this, the herdsman told him particularly that the kine would not have room enough, inasmuch as one stall was unclean [haunted]. The bishop said it should be so as he said and had fixed, and told him that he was to tie kine in that stall as [he did] in the others, and so it was done. But the morning after, when they came to the byre, there lay a cow in that very stall and she was dead. The bishop was told of this, and he bade them tie up another beast there, and then a third, and they died. Then the herdsman said to the bishop, &lsquo;How long is it to go on in this way?&rsquo; The bishop answers, &lsquo;It shall go on as long as there are any kine left, if God will that the place be wasted in this way.&rsquo; After that it stopped, and so bishop John won a victory over this evil oppression by his faith and steadfastness.

<p n=13.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> It happened on a certain spring that the spring was so late that the earth was but of little verdure at the flitting-days [end of May]. Then the holy bishop John rode to the All-moot and made a vow for the <pb id=pb561a n=561>bettering of the seasons for men on John the Baptist&apos;s day [June 24]. And when he had made his vow and plighted it, he followed it with these words, &lsquo;I would that God would give us dew now at once,&rsquo; and thereby it was manifest that he was a man that could not bear to wait. The summer had been droughty up to then, so that there had not fallen any dew, wherefore there was next to no grass. And when the holy bishop John made his vow the weather was then fine and clear, and not a speck to be seen in the heavens. But when he began the <hi lang=la>Gloria in excelsis</hi> that day at mass there came so great a rain from heaven that men thought it unbearable to be out of doors by reason of the wet weather. Thenceforward through the summer there were dews by night and sunshine by day, and so it went on for some time, and the grass crop was a middling one that summer.

<p n=13.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> This holy bishop John then was granted by God many markworthy portents <hi>or</hi> omens and fair visions, and it was not very wonderful that there were many markworthy things shown to him in dreams, for he took no more sleep than the least he could do with, and his mind was ever [set] before he slept and immediately he awoke on God&apos;s service and holy offices of prayer.

<p n=13.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> He had a vision the same night that there died south in Scal-holt priest Thor-kel, his foster-brother, who was called by a second name Trandill. He was the most worthy clerk. It happened after evensong, when the holy bishop was come to bed, and as soon as ever he laid his head on to the pillow there fell a drowsiness upon him, and he <pb id=pb562a n=562>thought that a man came in whom he did not know, and took his stand in the middle of the hall. He thought that this man was asked by them that were there if he could tell any tidings, and he said, &lsquo;Thor-kel sainted.&rsquo; He spake no more. The bishop woke and sprang up at once and called to Rikinne his arch-priest, and spake to him, &lsquo;Rise up, brother, and let us go to church and praise Almighty God, for priest Thor-kel our brother is now departed out of this life, and let us commend his soul to the hands of Almighty God.&rsquo; They had heard that he was sick. Then they went to church and did the office for the dead, and then he told the priest Rikinne the vision he had had.


<p>[<hi>Quotation from Libellus follows in MS.</hi>]

<p n=13.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Once on a time, when holy bishop John had laid him down one night to sleep, he had this vision. He thought that he was at his prayers before a great rood-cross, and straightway he thought that the image on the cross bent itself down to him, and spake certain words in his ear, and we know not what they were. This vision he told to Rikinne the priest, and there was no one that could interpret it. But the next day after there came to see the holy bishop John certain men, newly come from the sea, bringing him a book. In this book was this event written which was then little known in this land. It was said that the Jews had <pb id=pb563a n=563>tortured the image of our Lord Jesus Christ on a cross in that city which is called Beyrout, after the manner in which they had aforetime tortured our Lord Jesus Christ [himself]. They beat the image with lashes and spat upon it, and slapped it on the neck. After that they fastened it to the cross, and then went before the cross mocking the image, after the ensample of the Jews aforetime. After that they took a spear and thrust it cruelly into the side of the image. Then came to pass a marvellous thing and never heard of before. Water mingled with blood ran out of the side of the image, and by this water and blood many sick folk gat health. And when the Jews beheld this thing all together they repented with all their heart and turned to God. And when holy bishop John and priest Rikinne had read this thing, the priest spake to the bishop smiling, &lsquo;See here now, father, the dream that the Lord showed thee in the night!&rsquo; &lsquo;It is true,&rsquo; says the bishop, &lsquo;and let us praise God!&rsquo; And then they both praised the Lord Jesus Christ.

<p rend="align(center)">&ast;    &ast;    &ast;    &ast;    &ast;    &ast;

<p n=14.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 1.</ab> But when the time was come when Almighty God was minded to give an everlasting reward to the holy bishop John for the toil and trouble with great tribulations which he had borne for God&apos;s sake, then the holy bishop John fell ill, and of this same illness he departed this life. The illness was not violent, but he was able to set in order and consider all things as he wished them to be. And when he lay in this illness and was not yet anointed, there came to him one of his disciples, <pb id=pb564a n=564>a good scribe and a man beloved, a priest in orders. His name was Thor-ward, and he was called Knop of Knop-dale. He had with him a book which he had written and made for a priest that was at that time far away, and he had prayed him much to make the book, and they had agreed between them that the bishop should set a price on the book and the priest should buy it at that price. The bishop welcomed the priest and spake blithely to him: &lsquo;Come to me, my son, and give thy father the kiss of peace ere that I die like other brothers of thine.&rsquo; Then the priest went up to him and kissed him. After that he showed him the book, and told him what they had agreed between them as to his fixing the price, and prayed him to put a price on the book. The bishop looked at the book and praised it much, and then said, &lsquo;Good is this book, and well is it written, but it is not granted to him to have the book. Some other man will get it.&rsquo; The priest answers, &lsquo;Why, father? Do thou put a price on it, and he will gladly pay that for it, for he prayed me much to make him such a book.&rsquo; The bishop answers, &lsquo;I will do this if thou wilt, and put a price on the book, but there is no need so to do, for this same priest that thou didst mean the book for is now dead.&rsquo; It was some while between this and the time when the news came of the death of this same priest. And he was dead at the time when the bishop spake of his death. All men thought it a great thing that the holy bishop John should know such a thing when he was far away from where it happened.

<p n=14.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And now the holy bishop John began to sink fast, and though his <pb id=pb565a n=565>strength was ebbing out, yet he kept ever his offices of prayer as long as he could speak. After that he had himself anointed, and there were present all the clerks that were at the bishop&apos;s see, and other of his friends. He had already before ordered what he thought most convenient to be done. After that he let them give him <hi lang=la>corpus Domini</hi>, and when he had tasted thereof then he first sung this communio, <hi lang=la>Refecti ... eternam</hi>. After that he began the psalm <hi lang=la>Benedicam ... meo</hi>. These words run thus: &lsquo;I will praise the Lord every hour, and his praise shall ever be in my mouth&rsquo; [<xref url="bib:ps 33:1">Ps. vulg. xxxiii. 1</xref>]. And as he had this psalm in his mouth, and his tongue was yet moving with these holy words, his spirit departed from his body, and was borne of God&apos;s angels to that bliss that was prepared for him by Almighty God, and there he shall praise Almighty God for ever with other holy men, as he promised in the psalm which he sung last.

<p n=14.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Now the holy bishop John departed out of this world into everlasting bliss on Saturday, ix <hi>kal. Maii</hi> [April 23]. There were then gone from the birth of Christ eleven hundred and fourteen winters [1121]. He was hallowed bishop when he was four winters of the sixth ten [52], and he sat in his bishopric fifteen winters. And when he had lived in this world threescore winters and nine altogether, he died at a good age. It was in the days of pope Calixtus the second of that name. It was also in the days of Ey-stan and Sig-urd kings of Norway, but their <pb id=pb566a n=566>brother king O-laf was already dead. Bishop Thor-lac, Run-olf&apos;s son, was then bishop in Scal-holt.

<p n=14.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> The clerks that were present took good and fit care of the body of the holy bishop John [and arrayed him in a bishop&apos;s raiment], and when it was gone so far that the body was arrayed and made ready for the burial and the dirge song, and it was at the point to be carried out, then went those of the clerks that were to bear it, and took hold of the bier and tried to lift it up. Then that came about which all men that were there thought a great thing&mdash;the body became so heavy that they could in no wise lift it that were appointed to bear it. This gave them great concern, and they reasoned among themselves what might be the reason thereof. Then spake one of the clerks well and thoughtfully, and said, &lsquo;This thing must be the punishment of some fault of ours, and we must have done something unworshipfully in our service to our bishop. Now seek diligently whether he have all those things in his array that were fit and belonged to his consecration.&rsquo; Then they sought and made search until they found that they had not put his finger-ring on the hand of the holy bishop John, but it was lying there on the daïs. Then they <pb id=pb567a n=567>took the ring and put it on his hand, and after that the same men as before went up and easily lifted the body and bore it to the burial.

<p n=14.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> The body of the holy bishop John was buried outside the church, on the south of the choir [B: outside the church eastward, near to the south wall of the choir], and a vault made over it. There his bones lay fourscore winters and somewhat less, until God made manifest his glory by fair tokens, and his halidom was taken out of the ground. Then lord Brand the bishop had him worshipfully taken up and brought into the church, and appointed worshipfully with much glory to the praise of our Lord Jesus Christ. May he glorify himself for the sake of the worthiness of this holy friend of his and his prayers, in freeing us from evil and jeopardous things, and when we depart out of this world gather our souls to his elect. Grant this, God Almighty, that liveth and reigneth one God in Trinity, <foreign lang=la>per omnia secula seculorum.</foreign> Amen.


</div2>

<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">




<div1 id=s3.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 5.</ab> SECOND LIFE OF THORLAC.</head>

<p>In the middle or latter half of the 13th century some ecclesiastic, finding that the active life of Thorlac had not been recorded, and taking it to be of singular value to those of his day who were engaged in similar conflicts, was minded to supply the lacuna, as he says in his second prologue,&mdash;&lsquo;In the old setting forth of the story it seemeth to us that he [Thorlac] hath hardly gotten a worthy remembrance of those trials and sufferings that he underwent at the hands of his adversaries that arose to the hurt of the Church during his bishopric. For of this matter, we think, less hath been told than we could wish.&rsquo; <pb id=pb568 n=568>&lsquo;That good man [<hi>would he had given the name!</hi>] who first wrote the Life, begins thus.&rsquo; His own mode of work was, taking the older Life to put a new prologue at its head, and then insert in the body of the work a long and well-told history of Thorlac&apos;s political difficulties, in a brisk, vigorous style, without any disguise or concealment even in the case of good bishop Paul&apos;s birth, or the conduct of his near kinsfolk, which he touches on fearlessly and frankly. His point of view marks the change from primitive to medieval Church sympathies and theories, the severance of the Church from the great houses being accompanied with the rise of a new class of churchmen who were not contented with the position they found themselves occupying, but resolved that a change should be made regardless of the cost to themselves or others. His additional matter is in AM. 382 inscribed &lsquo;Oddaverja-Þáttr,&rsquo; from the family that are chiefly concerned in the struggle with the bishop.

<p>The latter part of the MSS. of this type which follow after the interpolation are, it happens, better than Cod. Holm. 5, in that their scribes have not shortened the text.

<p>If the words inserted, p. 462, 1. 4, &lsquo;then people came to the All-moot earlier than now,&rsquo; are not a gloss, the date would fall after 1271. The four first chapters, as also ch. 6. 4, remind one of bishop Arne&apos;s Saga when at its best. It is indeed difficult to realise how the artificial, ornamental preface (here given in small type and not translated), and the pithy, matter-of-fact &lsquo;Oddaverja-Þáttr,&rsquo; could have flowed from the same pen, yet so it must be; one represents the foreign Latin ecclesiastical fashion of the day, the other the regular Saga style of the vernacular Icelandic.

<p>Besides the &lsquo;Oddaverja-Þáttr,&rsquo; the author adds next to nothing, for the clauses, pp. 474, 480, are, one thinks, mere omissions on the part of the A-text, as is the clause on Macan (p. 478), which is found in our a. The only clauses are&mdash;the glass windows (p. 477), and three clauses given on the following page, viz. the parting gift of earl Erling specified, the tailoring after the fashion of the archbishop&apos;s clothes (hardly likely to be true), and the clause on the archbishop&apos;s message.

<p>The chief MS. of this second form of the Life is AM. 382, a vellum of mid-fourteenth century, which Arne Magnusson got from Thorlac&apos;s birth-place, Hlidarende. It has reached us in loose quaternions, folds of which have ever and anon fallen out and perished, one fold (p. 575, l. 7) and three folds (p. 585, l. 3). These blanks we can fill up partly from two vellum fragments, each containing a single fold of lost old sister MSS., now preserved in a capsa AM. 383. Their help is again supplemented by a modern vellum volume (made by one of bishop Thorlac Sculason&apos;s scribes, middle of the 17th century, from lost originals), which is referred to above, AM. 379. It is called C in the Editor&apos;s edition of 1858.

<p><hi>The Miracle Book of S. Thorlac</hi>, which is earlier than his Life, and indeed one of the chief instruments in his national canonization, must be mentioned here, though for its text we must refer the reader to the Editor&apos;s Biskopa Sogor, vol. i, Copenhagen, 1858. It is thus mentioned: <pb id=pb569 n=569><note place=margin>[263, 274, 275: 12.]</note>&lsquo;At the same All-moot (<hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi> 1199), at the request of the people, bishop Paul had read the miracles of the blessed bishop Thorlac which are written here in this book.&rsquo; And it is most probable that AM. 645 is one of the copies issued in that or the following year. But there are fresh editions, as it were, and abridgments of Thorlac&apos;s miracles suffixed to every account of his Life. All the various confused forms in which it occurs are printed in Biskopa Sogor. The miracles are of the usual type, and the style is oftentimes puerile and commonplace. They add no new facts to those recorded in the two Lives, and are altogether outside the scope of our present work.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 id=secondlife lang=is rend="align-with(en.secondlife)">
<head><hi lang=la>Incipit Prologus.</hi></head>

<p n=0.1 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a569.1>Í nafne Foðor ok Sonar ok Heilags Anda byrjaz her <hi>prologus</hi> epter-farande <anchor id=a569.2>sogo hver saman stendr af lífe ok iartegnom virðolegs herra Þorláks biskops <anchor id=a569.3>Þórhallz sonar, er sannlega má segjaz <hi>primas</hi> þessa lannz firer þá grein, at Dróttenn <anchor id=a569.4>várr Jesus Christus, sannr Guð ok sannr maðr, valðe hann fyrstan til þess af ollom <anchor id=a569.5>réttlátom monnom sínom á þesso lande at skína efalauslega í heilagleiks frægð,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a569.6>birtande hans dýrðar-fulla verðleika með háleitom stór-táknom. Þessa heilaga <anchor id=a569.7>mannz líf má cristnom manne vera svá sem en skýrasta skugg-sió til epter-dæmes, <anchor id=a569.8>þvi at Guð Dróttenn sýner þat með þeim iartegnom, sem veitaz firer hans verðleika, <anchor id=a569.9>at þesse blezaðe biskop hefer réttan boðorðanna veg genget. Má þat ok skilja <anchor id=a569.10>af hans sogo, at í ser-hverjom stétt síns lífs, frá bernsko ok til ens hæsta kennimannskapar,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a569.11>hefer hann auðgaðr veret góðom verkom um fram flesta aðra ser samtiða, <anchor id=a569.12>þó at fyrra hlut sínna lífdaga sýndez hann fylgja heimenom fyrer nockora <anchor id=a569.13>grein, þá var hann þó allt eins hlýðenn Guðe ok hans logmále. En svá sem hann <anchor id=a569.14>var biskop orðenn, fágaðe hann fagrlega ásiáno <hi>Skalholltensis</hi> cristne með setningo <anchor id=a569.15>boðorða sínna, brot sníðande lýte lastanna. Þesse same Guðs iáttare, skínande ok<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a569.16>ilmande með sínom heilagleik, vere nærre várom fram-burðe með síno árnaðar-orðe, <anchor id=a569.17>at ver megem maklega hlute skrifa, Guðe til lofs ok dýrðar, sialfom ser til sæmðar <anchor id=a569.18>ok virðingar, ollom heyrandom monnom til góðrar ok andlegrar huggunar.

<p n=0.2 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a569.19>Þat dregr oss miok til at skrifa líf ok iartegner þessa virðolegs herra ok <anchor id=a569.20>andalegs foðor, at í fornom fram-burðe sogonnar virðez oss hann varla hafa verðoga<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a569.21>minning af þeim þrautom ok meingerðom, sem hann hefer þolat af sínom mót-stoðo-monnom <anchor id=a569.22>þeím sem upp vóðo<note place=apparatus id=an569.1><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>vóðo]</ab> emend.; voro, Cd.</note> á kirkionnar skaða í hans biskopsdóme; ok <anchor id=a569.23>af þesso efne þiker oss minna talet en ver vildem. Enn hinn góðe maðr, sem í fyrsto <anchor id=a569.24>hefer soguna setta, byrjar svá sitt mál:&mdash;Á þeim tíma, etc.....


<milestone unit=tb>

<p n=0.2.1 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a569.25><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Herra Þorlákr þá af iarlenom hvít skinn ok silke ifer dreget, ok logðo þeir<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a569.26>feðgar mikla virðing alla tíma síðan til ens sæla Þorláks biskops, ok fálo sik under <anchor id=a569.27>hans bæner....

<p n=0.2.2 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a569.28><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Þorlákr biskop lét ser semja oll klæðe eptir klæðom Eysteins erki-biskops ok <anchor id=a569.29>helt þvílíkom buningi meðan hann lifðe.

<p n=0.2.3 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a569.30><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þat er ok greinanda, at herra Eysteinn erki-biskop opinberaðe hónum sínn<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a569.31>boðskap með brefom til Íslannz, at aller staðir er epter fornom vana heldozt af <anchor id=a569.32>leikmonnom, skylde nú aller vera under biskopa valde, efter þeim skilninge sem <anchor id=a569.33>hann sagði vátta postolanna reglo ok setningar heilagra Feðra. Ok ifer svá greindom <anchor id=a570.1><pb id=pb570 n=570><note place=margin>[280: 17, 18.]</note>boðskap fær hann hónom sín opin bréf kirkjonnar rétte framan at fylgja um allt <anchor id=a570.2>Scalhollz biskopsdæme; hver ny-vígðr biskop, sæll Þorlákr, við tekr ok tracterar, <anchor id=a570.3>flytr ok framm berr; sem síðarr mun greina í þesse sogo.


<p lang=en-UK><hi>Second Prologue.</hi>


<p n=0.3 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a570.4>En nú saker þess at greint er nokkot af sælo siðferðe þessa blezaða biskops, ok <anchor id=a570.5>eige síðr af hans biskoplegre r&oelig;ksemd, með heilagre hófsemd, því er vel<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a570.6>fallet þesso næst, at með eiginlego mále ok at-burðom heyrezt þeir váttar, er þat <anchor id=a570.7>prófa hverso maklegr Þorlákr var at bera hirðes nafnet; ok reiknaz eilíflega mille <anchor id=a570.8>þeirra biskopa, er framm fylgðo logom Almáttigs Guðs í fremsta megne; ok eige <anchor id=a570.9>hlífðo heldr sialfs síns líkama undan ofsóknar-sverðe; þó at Guð, er oll hefer <anchor id=a570.10>volden, skipe bæðe fyrir sína ásián <hi>rosas</hi> ok <hi>lilia</hi> ser til lofs ok dýrðar. Er þetta<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a570.11>harðla líteð ok stutt sem ver inn setjom, saker fá-fræðis, hiá því sem hann hefir efne <anchor id=a570.12>til gefet í sínom valdz-dogom ok ifir-ferðum á fimmtán árum. Ok því skal nú þar <anchor id=a570.13>byrja sogona, sem hann er ný kominn til Íslannz.


<p>ODDAVERJA-ÞÁTTR.

<p n=1.1><anchor id=a570.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> Þá er Þorlákr biskop hinn helge hafðe seteð einn vetr at <anchor id=a570.15>stóle sínom, byrjaðe hann ifer-ferð sína um sumaret<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a570.16>epter til Austfiarða. Ok er hann kom suðr um Lóma-gnúps-sand, <anchor id=a570.17>tók hann gisting at Svína-felle. Þar bió þá Sigurðr Orms son, <anchor id=a570.18>mikels háttar maðr af veraldar metnaðe, auðegr ok ætt-stórr: var <anchor id=a570.19>herra biskope þar vel fagnat, sem vera átte. En saker þess at bónde <anchor id=a570.20>vilde þar láta kirkjo vígja, þá kallaðe biskop hann til tals við sik um<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a570.21>morginenn epter, ok bar framm boðskap herra Eysteins erki-biskops, <anchor id=a570.22>þann sem hann bauð hónom, under sítt vald at heimta allar <anchor id=a570.23>kirkjor ok kirkna-fé í síno biskopsdæme. Sigurðr tók þesso <anchor id=a570.24>fiarre; ok sagðez eige mundo iá undan ser því sem hann hafðe áðr <anchor id=a570.25>frialslega haldet saker landz-skapar ok fornrar hefðar. Biskop<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a570.26>sagðe, at skipan sialfra postolanna gaf hónum vald ifer &aolig;llom Guðs <anchor id=a570.27>eignom fyr útan alla grein. &lsquo;Heilager feðr Cristnennar, ok pá&shy;farner <anchor id=a571.1><pb id=pb571 n=571><note place=margin>[281: 18.]</note>postolanna epter-komendr, hafa þetta sama boðet ok skipat <anchor id=a571.2>í kirkjonnar l&aolig;gom um alla Cristnena: svá ok hefer nú páfenn <anchor id=a571.3>boðet Eysteine erki-biskope at flytja þetta sama eyrende í Norege; <anchor id=a571.4>ok þat hefer þar framm genget. Er þat ok eige rétt eða þolanlegt, <anchor id=a571.5>at þetta et fátæka land stande eige under einom l&aolig;gom ok þar.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a571.6>Sigurðr svarar at &lsquo;Norr&oeacute;ner menn eða útlender mega eige iátta <anchor id=a571.7>undan oss várom réttindum.&rsquo; Þá svarar biskop: &lsquo;Sá skildage sem <anchor id=a571.8>ó-fróðer menn hafa her g&oelig;rfan, at skilja ser vald ifer þeim hlutom <anchor id=a571.9>sem þeir hafa áðr Guðe gefet, er af sialfum l&aolig;gonum ú-máttolegr, <anchor id=a571.10>ok á eige at haldaz; ok þar sem þetta mál verðr l&aolig;glega kært af<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a571.11>biskopom, ero þeir menn eige í þeirra manna t&aolig;lo sem hialpar eigo <anchor id=a571.12>ván af Guðe, síðan þeir haldaz í þeirre þriózko; ok hverer sem tí&shy;under <anchor id=a571.13>eða heilagra manna eigner halda með þráe, þeir ero bann&shy;setjande <anchor id=a571.14>epter l&aolig;glegar á-minningar, ef þeir vilja eige sættaz ok af <anchor id=a571.15>láta sínom rangendom.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=1.1.1><anchor id=a571.16>Leið þá á dagenn, svá at bónde sá, at kirkjo-vígslan mynde enge <anchor id=a571.17>verða nema hann léte af síno mále. Sn&oelig;re hann nú á svinn ráðeno, <anchor id=a571.18>ok leggr máldaga kirkjonnar ok sialfa hána í vald biskops. Vígðe <anchor id=a571.19>hann þá kirkjona, ok s&oelig;ng messo. Ok epter messona skipaðe hann <anchor id=a571.20>Sigurðe staðenn í lén um stundar saker, ok hann iár hónom at<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a571.21>halda.

<p n=1.2><anchor id=a571.22><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Fór biskop þaðan til Rauða-l&oeacute;kjar; bió þar Ormr enn <anchor id=a571.23>Gamle; hóf hann þar slíkt tilkall sem at Svína-felle, fór ok miok á <anchor id=a572.1><pb id=pb572 n=572><note place=margin>[282: 19.]</note>einn hátt, at Ormr lagðe kirkjo-forráð under biskop, en hann skipaðe <anchor id=a572.2>hónum: ok skildoz viner.

<p n=1.3><anchor id=a572.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Þorlákr biskop fór þaðan til Austfiarða með sama efne, ok <anchor id=a572.4>h&aolig;fðo flester s&aolig;mo sv&aolig;r firer ser þeir er á st&aolig;ðom sáto. En þó at <anchor id=a572.5>marger være treger til at iá undan ser sínar erfðer, þá kom þó      5<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a572.6>í einn stað niðr, at Þorlákr biskop feck forræðe á &aolig;llom st&aolig;ðom fyr <anchor id=a572.7>austan Hiorleifs-h&aolig;fða, útan at Þváttá ok Hallorms-st&aolig;ðom. Ok <anchor id=a572.8>þat hefer þar haldez iafnan síðan.



<p n=2.1><anchor id=a572.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> Í þann tíma réð Ioan Loptz son fyrer Odda, sá er þá <anchor id=a572.10>var mestr h&aolig;fðinge á Íslande: hann var goðorðz<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a572.11>maðr; hann var hinn vísaste maðr á clerklegar lister þær sem <anchor id=a572.12>hann hafðe numet af sínom forellrom; hann var diácn at vígslo, <anchor id=a572.13>radd-maðr mikell í heilagre kirkjo. Lagðe hann ok mikenn hug á, <anchor id=a572.14>at þær kirkjor være sem bezt setnar, er hann hafðe forræðe yfer, at <anchor id=a572.15>&aolig;llom hlutom. Fullr var hann af flestom í-þróttom þeim er m&aolig;nnom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a572.16>vóro tíðar í þann tíma. Metnaðar-maðr var hann svá mikell <anchor id=a572.17>ok kappsamr, at varla varð meire, þvi at hann vilde firer engom <anchor id=a572.18>vægja, eða af því láta sem hann tók upp. Kono átte hann ser er <anchor id=a572.19>Halldóra hét, ok var Brannz dótter: son þeirra var Sæmundr.

<p n=2.2><anchor id=a572.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ioan var miok fengenn firer kvenna-ást; þvi at hann átte<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a572.21>marga sono aðra með ymsom konom: Þórsteinn ok Hallbi&aolig;rn<note place=apparatus id=an572.1><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hallbi&aolig;rn]</ab> C (see Sturl. i. p. 189); Halldórr, Cd.</note>, <anchor id=a572.22>Sigurðr ok Einarr. En Póll, er síðan varð biskop, ok Ormr, er <anchor id=a573.1><pb id=pb573 n=573><note place=margin>[282: 19.]</note>síðan bió á Breiða-bólstað, vóro syner þeirra Ioans ok Ragneiðar <anchor id=a573.2>Þórhallz dóttor, systor Þorláks biskops: h&aolig;fðo þau Ioan elskaz <anchor id=a573.3>frá barnæsko; þó átte hon við fleirom m&aolig;nnom b&aolig;rn. Vóro <anchor id=a573.4>þeir þá frum-vaxte, Póll ok Ormr syner þeirra Ioans ok Ragneiðar, <anchor id=a573.5>er Þorlákr biskop kom til Íslannz með biskops-tign. Bió<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a573.6>Póll í Ytra-Skarðe; en Ormr á Breiða-bólstað. L&aolig;ngom helt <anchor id=a573.7>Ioan Ragneiðe heima í Odda.

<p n=2.3><anchor id=a573.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Í þann tíma hafðe Ioan komezt at H&aolig;fða-brecko-lande er <anchor id=a573.9>eitt-hvert þótte bezt vera, áðr en H&aolig;fð-á spillte. Þar hafðe út-synnings-stormr <anchor id=a573.10>broteð tvær kirkjor; en nú hafðe Ioan þar g&oelig;ra láteð<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a573.11>nýja kirkjo, ok miok vandaða at smíð; átte heilagr Þorlákr biskop <anchor id=a573.12>þar gisting at taka þat sama haust sem hann kom af Aust-fi&aolig;rðom, <anchor id=a573.13>ok fyrr var frá sagt. Var ætlat at hann skilde þar kirkjo vígja: <anchor id=a573.14>þar var búen vegleg veizla móte hónom. Ok at á-kveðnom dege <anchor id=a573.15>kemr hann þar með síno f&aolig;ro-neyte: Ioan var þar firer ok marger<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a573.16>aðrer mikels-háttar menn.

<p n=2.4><anchor id=a573.17><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Um morginenn bióz biskop til kirkjo-vígslo; en Ioan ok þeir <anchor id=a573.18>menn sem í ráðe vóro með hónom, gengo til biskops, ok var talat <anchor id=a573.19>um epter siðvenjo<note place=apparatus id=an573.1><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>epter siðvenjo]</ab> add. C.</note> hverr-kirkjo-máldage skilde vera. Herra biskop <anchor id=a573.20>spurðe, svá sem fylgjande réttendom, hvárt Ioan hefðe heyrðan<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a573.21>erki-biskops boðskap um kirkna-eigner. Ioan svaraðe: &lsquo;Heyra <anchor id=a573.22>má-ek erki-biskops boðskap, en ráðenn em-ek í at halda hann at <anchor id=a574.1><pb id=pb574 n=574><note place=margin>[283: 19.]</note>engo; ok eige hygg-ek at hann vile betr né vite, en míner forellrar, <anchor id=a574.2>Sæmundr enn Fróðe ok syner hans. Mun-ek ok eige firer-dæma <anchor id=a574.3>fram-ferðer biskopa várra her í lande, er sæmðo þann lannz sið, at <anchor id=a574.4>leik-menn réðo þeim kirkjom, er þeirra forellrar gáfo Guðe, ok <anchor id=a574.5>skilðo ser vald ifer ok síno af-kvæme.&rsquo; Biskop svaraðe slíkom<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a574.6>skynsemðom sem fyrr vóro lesnar ok m&aolig;rgom &aolig;ðrom, svá segjande: <anchor id=a574.7>&lsquo;Vel veizt þú þat, Ioan, ef þú vilt s&aolig;nno fylgja, at biskop á <anchor id=a574.8>kirkjo-eignom at ráða ok tíundom, epter setningom Postolanna, <anchor id=a574.9>ok annarra heilagra feðra; ok þvi at leik-menn mego ecke ifer þeim <anchor id=a574.10>hlutom vald eignaz, þá má þeim þat vald aldre meðr fornre hefð<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a574.11>frelsaz; vænter-ek, at for-menn kirkjonnar, þá sem firer oss hafa <anchor id=a574.12>veret, afsake þat miok, at þeim var eige boðet af sínom ifer-m&aolig;nnom, <anchor id=a574.13>at kalla kirkjor ok tiunder under sítt vald ...<note place=apparatus id=an574.1><ab type=lineNumRef>13.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> something is missing here.</note> ok því ero <anchor id=a574.14>þeir bannsetjande sem tíundom eðr Guðs eignom halda með <anchor id=a574.15>þriózko móte biskopa vilja ok sam-þycke.&rsquo; Ioan svaraðe: &lsquo;Þer<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a574.16>megot kalla þann bann-settan sem þer vilet, en aldre mun-ek í <anchor id=a574.17>yðvart vald iá mínne eign undan mer, minne kirkjo eða meire, <anchor id=a574.18>þeirre sem ek hefer vald ifer.&rsquo;

<p n=2.5><anchor id=a574.19><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Enn var &aolig;nnor grein millem þeirra ok stóð út af H&aolig;fðár-hlaupe; <anchor id=a574.20>þvi at hon hafðe teket marga bæe þá er þangat lágo under,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a574.21>ok tvá þá er kirkjor vóro á: varð af því minne tiund, ok fære hús til <anchor id=a574.22>brot-s&oelig;ngs; vilde Ioan firer því, at eige være meir en einn prestr ok <anchor id=a575.1><pb id=pb575 n=575><note place=margin>[284: 19.]</note>diacn at kirkjonne; en áðr vóro tveir prestar, ok tveir diácnar. Lét <anchor id=a575.2>herra biskop þat leiðaz firer þessa s&aolig;mo skynseme; en um hina <anchor id=a575.3>fyrre grein hélt hvárr á síno mále; ok leið miok á dagenn. En <anchor id=a575.4>þeir sem létoz vera beggja viner, báðo biskop leggja af síno male; ok <anchor id=a575.5>&aolig;ll alþýða dró þat sama, saker forns ú-vana. Ok er Þorlákr biskop<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a575.6>sá þat, at hann mynde eige at sinne framm koma síno mále, þá <anchor id=a575.7>sprutto þesse orð af munne hónom: &lsquo;Þó at ó-þolanlegt sé, ef firer <anchor id=a575.8>rétta dómendr kemr, at þú drager kirkjonnar forráð under þik,<note place=apparatus id=an575.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Two leaves missing in 382.</note> <anchor id=a575.9>efter lannz-sið, ok undan biskopom: þá er miklo ó-þolanlegra þat, <anchor id=a575.10>er biskopar fá eige frá þer teket hór-konor þínar, þær sem þú heldr<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a575.11>móte &aolig;llom lannz sið; kann vera þú ráðer eno meira, ef þú ræðr eno <anchor id=a575.12>minna, þó at þú viler verr.&rsquo; Því hyggja menn at Þorlákr biskop <anchor id=a575.13>mælte þesse orð, at hann fann at alþýðan fylgðe Ioane um kirkjo-málen; <anchor id=a575.14>vægðe hann þvi at sinne, at hann sá engan á-v&aolig;xt á vera, <anchor id=a575.15>þótt hann helde framm; en mikenn skaða á marga vega; ok æt&shy;laðe<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a575.16>síðarr, með erki-biskops fulltinge, at kirkjan mynde fá sín <anchor id=a575.17>réttinde. En þaðan sem hann vánaðe huggun at fá, kómo h&aolig;r&shy;mungar <anchor id=a575.18>tíðende, þvi at lítlo síðarr var Eysteinn erki-biskop land-flæmðr <anchor id=a575.19>firer kirkna-mál. Þóttozt aller her á lande mega þar epter <anchor id=a575.20>g&oelig;ra, sem menn gærðo firer í Norege.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<pb id=pb576 n=576><note place=margin>[284: 20.]</note>

<p n=2.6><anchor id=a576.1><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Þenna dag vígðe biskop kirkjo ok s&oelig;ng messo, þó (at) þar <anchor id=a576.2>yrðe eige hans vile fram-gengr. Unðe hann lítt við þesse mála-lok; <anchor id=a576.3>g&oelig;rðo ok aller aðrer at dæmom Ioans síðan, at enger vildo <anchor id=a576.4>gefa kirkjor í vald Þorláks biskops; ok því féll niðr sú kæra um <anchor id=a576.5>hans daga.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=2.7><anchor id=a576.6><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Marger hluter báro til á d&aolig;gom Þorláks biskops, er mikellar <anchor id=a576.7>frá-sagnar ero verðer, þótt her sé til fárra innt; þvi at hann þolðe <anchor id=a576.8>hvers-kyns mæðo ok meinsemðer af ymislegom tilferlom, saker <anchor id=a576.9>ranglætes ok ó-hlýðne sínna under-manna; svá sem heyraz má í <anchor id=a576.10>þeim at-burðom, sem her fylgja:&mdash;<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>



<p n=3.1><anchor id=a576.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> Maðr sá er H&aolig;gne hét bió á Bæ í Borgar-firðe; hann <anchor id=a576.12>var Þormóðar son, prestr at vígslo ok miok auðegr, <anchor id=a576.13>en ætt-smár. Kona hans hét Geirlaug, ok var Árna dótter. Ey&shy;jolfr <anchor id=a576.14>Stafhyltingr átte dóttor þeirra; hann var auð-maðr mikell: <anchor id=a576.15>Onnor dótter H&aolig;gna var Snælaug; hón sat heima ó-gefen. Hón<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a576.16>fædde barn þat er kennt var verk-manne f&aolig;ðor hennar, er Gunnarr <anchor id=a576.17>hét, ok var kallaðr Nauta-tík. Ecki hataðe H&aolig;gne hána firer þat; <anchor id=a576.18>ok ecke hélt hann nú dóttor sínne minnr á loft, an áðr þetta <anchor id=a576.19>gerðez.

<p n=3.2><anchor id=a576.20><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Svá bar til, at Snælaug var vistom í Saurbæ á Hvalfiarðar-str&aolig;nd;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a576.21>þar lagðe þocka á hána Þórðr prestr, son B&aolig;ðvars í G&aolig;rðom <anchor id=a576.22>á Akra-nese; hónom rann hugr til kononnor; fóro þeir feðgar <anchor id=a576.23>í Bæ, ok báðo H&aolig;gna gifta Þórðe konona; varð því keypt; fær <anchor id=a577.1><pb id=pb577 n=577><note place=margin>[285: 20.]</note>Þórðr Snælaugar; unnozt þau miket, ok átto son saman. Sá maðr <anchor id=a577.2>er Hreinn hét, sonr Hermundar er þá bió á Gils-backa, hafðe veret <anchor id=a577.3>á fóstre með H&aolig;gna þann tíma er Snælaug átte laun-barnet. <anchor id=a577.4>Hann hafðe útan faret; ok fréttez andlát hans af Norege. Ok er <anchor id=a577.5>þat kom firer þau H&aolig;gna ok Snælaugu, sagðe hón hann veret hafa<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a577.6>f&aolig;ðor at Guðrúno dóttor sínne, en þorat eige upp at kveða, sakar <anchor id=a577.7>ríkess Hermundar f&aolig;ðor hans. Ok er þetta varð al-kunnegt, prófaz <anchor id=a577.8>þeir fiór-menningar Þórðr ok Hreinn.

<p n=3.3><anchor id=a577.9><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ok er Þorlákr biskop varð þessa víss, firerbauð hann þeim <anchor id=a577.10>Þórðe ok Snælaugo samvister. En með þvi at þau unnoz miket,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a577.11>gáfo þau lítenn gaum at hvat hann sagðe. Efter þat forboðaðe <anchor id=a577.12>hann þau, ok bann-sette þar næst. Biskop geck ok sialfr á Alþinge <anchor id=a577.13>til L&aolig;gbergs, ok lýste því, at hann sagðe í sundr þeim hiúskap er <anchor id=a577.14>veret hafðe í millom þeirra, ok sagðe laun-geten b&aolig;rn þeirra, sem <anchor id=a577.15>geten vóro upp frá því sem mein vóro vitoð. Þetta líkaðe þeim<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a577.16>Þórðe ok H&aolig;gna ílla, svá at þeir l&aolig;gðo fullan fiándskap til biskops <anchor id=a577.17>móte hans heilræðom ok um-vandan; drógo þeir menn til með ser <anchor id=a577.18>at veita hónom mótgang.

<p n=3.4><anchor id=a577.19><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> H&aolig;gne hafðe faret til Noregs efter viðar-farme, ok láteð gera <anchor id=a577.20>kirkjo í Bæ: þar hafðe eige meira prest-kaup goldez áðr en tolf<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a577.21>aurar. H&aolig;gne miste embættes síns, saker svika þeirra, er hann <anchor id=a577.22>hafðe saman dreget ó-leyft hióna-lag, ok hélt með máge sínom ok <anchor id=a577.23>dóttor móte biskope um s&aolig;gð mál. Þorlákr biskop talaðe oft til, at <anchor id=a578.1><pb id=pb578 n=578><note place=margin>[285: 20.]</note>hann vilde vígja kirkjo í Bæ. En H&aolig;gne visse, at biskop kallaðez <anchor id=a578.2>eiga forráð ok vald á &aolig;llom kirkjo-fiám; ok því firer-tók hann at <anchor id=a578.3>sú kirkja mynde nockorn tíma vígð vera, meðan hann mætte um <anchor id=a578.4>mæla, til þess at biskop ætte þar vald ifer; ok sagðe at þat skylde <anchor id=a578.5>5 skraut-legast hrossa-hús á Íslande, ef hann réðe þesso eige. En <anchor id=a578.6>biskop neitaðe þessom koste, ok létte eige af réttre um-vandan, <anchor id=a578.7>sýnande sik eige vera reyr-v&aolig;nd linleiks, heldr &oelig;ruggan fylgjara <anchor id=a578.8>sannleiks. Eige óttaðez hann ógner þeirra prestanna eðr hótan.



<p n=4.1><anchor id=a578.9><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> Fyrr-nefndr Eyjolfr fell allr móte biskope saker <anchor id=a578.10>mága sínna, ok svá firer þat, at hann hafðe hann í<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a578.11>stór-mælom firer kvenna-mál. Sú var ok ein s&aolig;k þeirra í millom, <anchor id=a578.12>at biskope þótte Eyjolfr ranglega halda staðenn í Stafa-holte, þó at <anchor id=a578.13>héraðs-menn hefðe hann þar niðr settan útan biskops ráð; <anchor id=a578.14>þar sem Steine prestr hafðe eige staðenn gefet í erfðer, útan skilet <anchor id=a578.15>15 tvá kvenn-ómaga ór sínne ætt ævinlega á staðenn. Nú af því, at <anchor id=a578.16>biskop linaðezt ecki, geck Þórðr ok Snælaug til sætta við hann at <anchor id=a578.17>kalla, ok tóko lausner ok skrifter.  Fiár-skipte ok skilnaðr var <anchor id=a578.18>á þann veg, at Þórðr skilde vera í G&aolig;rðom, ok hafa sítt fé, en <anchor id=a578.19>Snælaug í Bæ með sínom peningom. Endezt þat eige betr en svá <anchor id=a578.20>20 af Þórðe, at þau vóro l&aolig;ngom á-samt, ok átto þriá sono: Þórleif, <anchor id=a578.21>Márkús, ok B&aolig;ðvar; vóro þau stundom í sætt, en stundom í forboðan <anchor id=a578.22>af biskope.

<pb id=pb579 n=579><note place=margin>[286: 20.]</note>

<p n=4.2><anchor id=a579.1><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Kirkjo-mál fór ecki til vegar. En eitt sinn, ór biskop reið um <anchor id=a579.2>herað, sat Eyjolfr firer hónom við Gríms-á, ok tók hest-tauma hans, <anchor id=a579.3>ok lét hann eige framm fara. Biskop vilde ecki með hann tala, þvi <anchor id=a579.4>at hann var í stór-mælom. Eyjolfr mælte þá: &lsquo;Þat er mítt erende, <anchor id=a579.5>at ek vil at þú fester mer sialf-dæme firer klerka þína tvá, þá er<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a579.6>mágar míner, Bæjar-menn, eigo legordz saker á at kæra um bænda <anchor id=a579.7>dætr ser skildar; en ek hefer nú teket þesse mál.&rsquo; Biskop svarar<note place=apparatus id=an579.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> AM. 382 resumes.</note> <anchor id=a579.8>engo. Eyjolfr reiddez þá ok mælte: &lsquo;Eige munu þer ó-skemðer <anchor id=a579.9>undan komazt, nema þú fester sialf-dæmet.&rsquo; Sá maðr er Þórleifr <anchor id=a579.10>hét, ok kallaðr Beiskalde&mdash;hann bió í Hitárdal&mdash;var í f&aolig;r með biskope.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a579.11>Hann sá, at til ú-hæfo horfðe; ok því reið hann framm at <anchor id=a579.12>Eyjolfe ok mælte: &lsquo;Viltú at ek handsala þer sialf-dæmet, ok láter <anchor id=a579.13>þú biskop fara friálsan?&rsquo; Eyjolfr mælte: &lsquo;Eige gerer biskop þat <anchor id=a579.14>er þú gerer; á-ek engar saker við þik.&rsquo; Þórleifr mælte: &lsquo;M&aolig;rgom <anchor id=a579.15>m&aolig;nnom muno tæk þickja hands&aolig;l mín; ok ef þú tekr þau eige,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a579.16>þá muno ver iafn-snimma skemder vera.&rsquo; Eyjolfr tók þá þenna <anchor id=a579.17>kost, ok d&oelig;mðe þegar fimm hundroð mó-rendrar v&aolig;ro á hvárn kler&shy;kenn; <anchor id=a579.18>ok skildozt at því. En upp frá þesso geck Eyjolfr hvár<hi>t</hi>ki <anchor id=a579.19>(til) tírs né tíma; fórozt penningarner, en hann ok hús-frú hans <anchor id=a579.20>lifðo eige lenge. Are, son hans, var lostenn lík-þrá, ok Ólof dótter<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a579.21>hans varð half-fífla; ok selðe hann Snorra Sturlo syne, meðr ráðe <anchor id=a579.22>Snælaugar í Bæ, staðar-forráð; en hann skilde gifta hána ok fá <anchor id=a580.1><pb id=pb580 n=580><note place=margin>[286: 21.]</note>henne penninga. En gifting sú kom ecki framm, ok átte hon b&aolig;rn <anchor id=a580.2>með strákom.

<p n=4.3><anchor id=a580.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Einn tíma giste heilagr Þorlákr biskop í Reykjaholte at <anchor id=a580.4>Magnusar prestz: hann reið við flock manna suðr under Múla-fell <anchor id=a580.5>með herra biskope; ok at skilnaðe mælte hann: &lsquo;Veit-ek at þenna<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a580.6>dag munoð-ér liðs þurfa, ok því hafða-ek marga menn meðr mer; <anchor id=a580.7>vil-ek fylgja yðr til þess at ek veit yðr hætto-laust vera.&rsquo; Biskop <anchor id=a580.8>mælte: &lsquo;Hvaðan mun þat at koma?&rsquo; Magnus svaraðe: &lsquo;Heyrt <anchor id=a580.9>hefer-ek at H&aolig;gna í Bæ líkar ílla, þat er ér hafet mága hans í stór-mælom, <anchor id=a580.10>Þórð ok Eyjolf; en vilet eige vígja kirkjo hans, nema þér<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a580.11>ráðet máld&aolig;gom; ok þicker hónom brotenn lannz-réttr á sér: því <anchor id=a580.12>trúer-ek, at hann ætlar at þer skilet í Bæ gista í kveld, en eige í <anchor id=a580.13>Saur-bæ, sem þer hafet ætlað.&rsquo; Biskop svaraðe: &lsquo;Haf þ&aolig;ck firer <anchor id=a580.14>fylgð þína ok trúleika; en þú skalt heim ríða, ok fara vel; under <anchor id=a580.15>Guðe er vár ferð; ecke mein muno Bæjar-menn mer gera.&rsquo; Magnus<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a580.16>svarar: &lsquo;Svá skal vera sem þer vilet; en segja vilda-ek yðr hvat <anchor id=a580.17>varaz var, ok láta til reiðo mítt f&aolig;ro-neyte.&rsquo; Biskop svarar: &lsquo;Far <anchor id=a580.18>vel, vinrer, Guð mon gæta vár.&rsquo; Riðo Reykhyltingar þá heim; en <anchor id=a580.19>biskop fór framm til Gríms-ár; en under hennar sand-b&aolig;ckom, við <anchor id=a580.20>vað þat er Steins-vað er kallat, sáto þeir H&aolig;gne ok mágar hans<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a580.21>með marga menn. En þegar biskop ok hans menn kómo í <anchor id=a580.22>lægðena, riðo H&aolig;gna menn framm firer þá, ok b&aolig;nnoðo þeim <anchor id=a580.23>g&aolig;tona. Biskop spurðe hví þeir gerðe svá. H&aolig;gne prestr reið <anchor id=a581.1><pb id=pb581 n=581><note place=margin>[287: 21.]</note>þá framm ok mælte: &lsquo;Nú ætla-ek at þú skiler vígja kirkjo í Bæ, ok <anchor id=a581.2>snúa heim með mer.&rsquo; Biskop svaraðe: &lsquo;Í Saurbæ hefer ek ætlað <anchor id=a581.3>mína ferð; en eige í Bæ.&rsquo; H&aolig;gne mælte: &lsquo;Ek verð nú at ráða, <anchor id=a581.4>ok enge er annarr kostr.&rsquo; Þorlákr biskop vilde eige þess bíða, at <anchor id=a581.5>hann være hand-tekenn, heldr fór hann með þessom óvinar-flocke,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a581.6>ok var í Bæ þá nótt: en hverge sveigðez hugr hans firer þeirra <anchor id=a581.7>kúgan, heldr fór hann í braut í friðe, at vild sínna ó-vina, síðan <anchor id=a581.8>þeir sá hann búenn at þola &aolig;ll vandræðe heldr en sveigja rétt&shy;enden <anchor id=a581.9>meðr nockors-konar ó-einorð eða hug-leyse. Fundoz þá <anchor id=a581.10>hans mót-st&aolig;ðo-menn at sínom ó-iafnaðe, er þeir sá hans stað&shy;feste:<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a581.11>vóro þá fengner til hiner vitrosto menn til meðal-g&aolig;ngo um <anchor id=a581.12>heiman-fylgjo kirkjonnar ok tíða-offr prestz. Sá herra biskop þat, <anchor id=a581.13>at þá var meira vert, at marger menn ok mikels-verðer, þeir sem <anchor id=a581.14>áðr vóro mót-st&aolig;ðo-menn kirkjonnar, yrðe hennar viner, þó at <anchor id=a581.15>H&aolig;gne hefðe sína beizslo um þat, at kirkja ætte heldr út-l&aolig;nd en<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a581.16>heima-land, þar sem hón feck þó fulla pen(nin)ga<note place=apparatus id=an581.1><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> penga, Cd.</note> at fiár-tale. <anchor id=a581.17>Kómo nú hvárer-tveggio, Eyjolfr ok H&aolig;gne, Þórðr ok Snælaug, ok <anchor id=a581.18>tóko laustn. Geck Eyjolfr þá ór kvenna-vandræðe því er hann <anchor id=a581.19>hafðe áðr í leget. Efter þat fór biskop aftr í Bæ, ok þá þar fagra <anchor id=a581.20>veizlo; var þar miket fiolmenne ok veitt af kappe. Biskop vígðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a581.21>þar kirkjo með þeim máldaga sem þeir H&aolig;gne ok biskop urðo á <anchor id=a581.22>sátter. Affara-dag veizlonnar gaf H&aolig;gne biskope sæmelegar giafer, <anchor id=a581.23>ok skilðoz þá með vinátto. Þaðan fór Þorlákr biskop í Stafholt; <anchor id=a582.1><pb id=pb582 n=582><note place=margin>[288: 22.]</note>gaf Eyjolfr biskope þá þat fé, sem Þórleifr hafðe handfest firer <anchor id=a582.2>hann. Fór herra biskop heim þat haust. Sættez herra biskop við <anchor id=a582.3>þessa menn til þess at mínka vandræðe; en hváreger l&aolig;gðo fulla <anchor id=a582.4>alv&aolig;ro til annarra.

<p n=4.4><anchor id=a582.5><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Marger menn veitto Þorláke biskope mikenn mótgang, þó at                      <ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a582.6>sumer yrðe at því berare en sumer; þvi at þeir virðo hónom til <anchor id=a582.7>harðleiks ok miskunar-leyses við folket, er hann vandaðe um ó-siðo <anchor id=a582.8>ok bera glæpe vándra manna, ok þr&oelig;ngðe þeim með valde ok <anchor id=a582.9>stríðo heilagrar kirkjo, sem eige vildo leið-réttaz við hans hialp&shy;samlegar <anchor id=a582.10>á-minningar.                  <ab type=lineNum>10</ab>



<p n=5.1><anchor id=a582.11><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Sveinn hét maðr<note place=apparatus id=an582.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Af Sveini uheppna, inscr. in 382.</note>, son Hvammz-Sturlo, ó-eirenn ok <anchor id=a582.12>ó-ráðvandr. Þesse maðr lagðe í reckio hiá ser ná-frænd-kono <anchor id=a582.13>hús-frú sínnar: hann bió í Nyrðra-Reykjar-firðe á <anchor id=a582.14>Str&aolig;ndom í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge. Sælom Þorláke biskope mis&shy;líkaðe <anchor id=a582.15>miok þetta hans til-ferle, ok veitte um-vandan, fyrst með                    <ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a582.16>fort&aolig;lom ok á-minningom, en síðan með forboðom ok banne; <anchor id=a582.17>þvi at Sveinn harðnaðe á því meirr í sínne íllzko, sem biskop hann <anchor id=a582.18>oftarr á-minte at betra sítt ráð.

<p n=5.2><anchor id=a582.19><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ok þann tíma er heilagr Þorlákr biskop fór um þenna <anchor id=a582.20>fiórðung, aflaðe þesse same Sveinn ser sveitar til þess at sitja firer           <ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a582.21>biskope. Þeir fóro heiman, ok á þá leið, sem þeir hugðo biskop <anchor id=a582.22>mundo ríða. Ok er þeir kómo stund<note place=apparatus id=an582.2><ab type=lineNumRef>22.</ab> <ab type=textRef>stund]</ab> C; skamt, Cd.</note> frá bænom, gerðe at þeim <anchor id=a583.1><pb id=pb583 n=583><note place=margin>[289: 23.]</note>þoko, svá at þeir sá eige vegenn. En er þeir h&aolig;fðo lenge faret <anchor id=a583.2>á-framm, l&aolig;gðoz þeir niðr þar sem þeir vóro komner, saker myrkrs; <anchor id=a583.3>en biskop ok hans menn riðo í bi&aolig;rto veðre. En þann tíma sem <anchor id=a583.4>marger menn kómo móte biskope, svá at Sveinn hafðe ecke liðs <anchor id=a583.5>við þeim, létte af myrkvanom, ok sá þeir nú, at þeir h&aolig;fðo villt<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a583.6>faret; ok svá þat, at biskop var um riðenn, svá at þeir átto ecki <anchor id=a583.7>vald á hónom. Kende hverr &aolig;ðrom þat er þeir h&aolig;fðo villzt; ok <anchor id=a583.8>af þesso sundr-þycke dró þeim svá mikla ú-hamingio til handa, at <anchor id=a583.9>þeir unnoz á, ok Sveinn drap þann mann er Orn hét, við þá laug <anchor id=a583.10>sem þar er í firðenom. Féck Sveinn ok hans f&aolig;ro-nautar bæðe<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a583.11>skióta hegnd ok maklega firer þat, er hann vilde nauðung gera <anchor id=a583.12>Guðs manne. En biskop ok hans menn fóro friálslega efter sínom <anchor id=a583.13>vilja.



<p n=6.1><anchor id=a583.14><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> Herra Þorlákr biskop kærðe marga hlute á Ioan <anchor id=a583.15>Loftz son í Odda, bæðe um hór-dóma ok rangan<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a583.16>fiár-afla; ok einkanlega um þat, at hann hélt Ragneiðe, systor <anchor id=a583.17>hans, heima hiá ser meðr fullo þráe ok ó-hlýðne, at lifande hús-frú <anchor id=a583.18>sínne. En þó at Ioan svaraðe at nockoro hófe um aðrar á-kærslor <anchor id=a583.19>biskops, þá vilde hann þó til engrar sættar ganga at skilja við <anchor id=a583.20>Ragneiðe. Kom svá um síðer at biskop forboðaðe. Ioan angraðe<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a583.21>miok at þola stríðo af biskope, saker metnaðar; ok þess annars, er <anchor id=a583.22>marger átto íllan hlut at þeirra málom, ok einkanlega Þórsteinn <anchor id=a583.23>son hans, er bió í Gunnars-holte: hann eggjaðe f&aolig;ðor sínn meðr <anchor id=a583.24>ú-heyrelegre heimsko í h&aolig;fot biskope, en Ioan ætlaðe enn sem <anchor id=a584.1><pb id=pb584 n=584><note place=margin>[289: 23.]</note>fyrr meðr kúgan biskop kl&oelig;kk<hi>v</hi>an at g&oelig;ra, heldr en vápn á hann <anchor id=a584.2>at bera.

<p n=6.2><anchor id=a584.3><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Ok einn tíma þá er Þorlákr biskop fór í sýslo sína, ok hann <anchor id=a584.4>átte vegenn í gegnom bæenn í Odda, hugðe Ioan at handtaka <anchor id=a584.5>biskop ok kúga, sem hann g&oelig;rðe við marga. Hann sette menn<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a584.6>tveim-megen geila þeirra, sem fyr austan bæenn ero, ok hugðo <anchor id=a584.7>biskop þar mundo um fara; þvi at hann reið ór Eyjom neðan ok <anchor id=a584.8>upp á Rangár-v&aolig;llo. Ok er þeir kómo ifer eystre Rang-á, sýndez <anchor id=a584.9>þeim í Odda, sem þycka þoko legðe ór hafe upp, svá at nær sá <anchor id=a584.10>ecki: endez hón þar til at biskop ok hans menn vóro ór aug-sýn.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a584.11>En þeir sem í forsáte vóro, hugðo at biskop mynde aðra leið faret <anchor id=a584.12>hafa. Fylgðar-menn biskops sá gerla menn sitja tveim-megin <anchor id=a584.13>geila; en þvi at þeir visso eige hverjo þat gegnðe, fóro þeir <anchor id=a584.14>ó-hrædder, þvi at hiner buðo þeim engan ótta. Ok er Ioan visse <anchor id=a584.15>þessa sína ætlan brostna, reið hann til búa sínna í svig við biskop<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a584.16>með s&aolig;mo ætlan, ok nockorer menn með hónom. Hann vand&shy;ræddez <anchor id=a584.17>þó um firer vinom sínom, hverso hann skilde með h&aolig;ndom <anchor id=a584.18>hafa þau harðinde, sem hann þóttez af biskope fá. Þórsteinn, son <anchor id=a584.19>hans, var þá hiá hónom ok mælte: &lsquo;Ek mun leysa þenna vanda, <anchor id=a584.20>faðer, ok ráða af biskop þenna, er ó-dæme gerer á m&aolig;nnom.&rsquo; Ioan<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a584.21>svaraðe: &lsquo;Fara máttú til mótz við biskop, ef þer líkar; en <anchor id=a584.22>annarrar ú-gifto mun þer auðet verða, en vinna ifer Þorlák um <anchor id=a584.23>nockorn hlut; &oelig;ngom mun þat ætlað vera útan mer einom, ef ek <anchor id=a585.1><pb id=pb585 n=585><note place=margin>[290: 23.]</note>vil mín til liá.&rsquo; Þórsteinn kvazt ecki því trúa; ok fór með nockora <anchor id=a585.2>menn; ok kómo þeir á V&aolig;llo þá er biskop var ifer borðom. Ok <anchor id=a585.3>er þeir sá menn út ganga, spurðo þeir hvar biskop være; þeim var<note place=apparatus id=an585.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>var]</ab> blank of six leaves lost in 382.</note> <anchor id=a585.4>sagt, at hann være ifer borðe. Þórsteinn tók þá at heitaz miok <anchor id=a585.5>við biskop, ef hann genge út. Þeir sem til dura h&aolig;fðo genget,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a585.6>kómo inn. Þeir vóro spurðer hverer menn være komner. Þeir <anchor id=a585.7>s&aolig;gðo at komenn være Þórsteinn Ioans son ok menn með hónom <anchor id=a585.8>miok vápnaðer, ok at Þórsteinn heitaðez miok við hann, ef hann <anchor id=a585.9>genge út. S&aolig;gð h&aolig;fðo biskope veret orð hans fyrre, ok sv&aolig;r <anchor id=a585.10>f&aolig;ðor hans, svá ok &aolig;ll til-ætlan Ioans. Heima-menn l&aolig;tto biskop<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a585.11>út at ganga, en hann, &oelig;ruggr ok ó-skelfðr móte ótta vándra manna, <anchor id=a585.12>svarar, &lsquo;Ganga mun-ek til kirkio sem ek em vanr, ecki mun þesse <anchor id=a585.13>maðr g&oelig;ra mer til meins.&rsquo; Heima-menn mælto þá: &lsquo;Herra, siteð <anchor id=a585.14>inne, ok syngeð á psaltara yðarn, ok hætteð yðr ecki under vápn <anchor id=a585.15>heljar-mannzens þess er einskis svífzt.&rsquo; Biskop svarar: &lsquo;Fara<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a585.16>mun-ek sem ek hefe ætlat, en ef þesse maðr gerer mer nockot, ...<note place=apparatus id=an585.2><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> <ab type=textRef>...]</ab> something is here missing.</note> <anchor id=a585.17>&dagger;má vera at ek þurfa þá eige meira munar.&rsquo; Efter þat geck biskop <anchor id=a585.18>út; ok er Þórsteinn leit hann, þá dvalðe hann eige upp at reiða <anchor id=a585.19>&oelig;xena. En þat var<note place=apparatus id=an585.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>var]</ab> er, Cd.  </note> eige unnt at sl&oelig;ma<note place=apparatus id=an585.4>sl&oelig;ma] emend.; dæma, Cd.?</note> henne; hann mátte henne <anchor id=a585.20>eigi framm h&oelig;ggva, ætlande þat at Guðs kraftr hefðe hann tálmat.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a585.21>Í því leit biskop við hónom, ok mælte ecki, ok geck til kirkjo sem <anchor id=a585.22>hann hafðe ætlat. Þórsteinn fór at finna f&aolig;ðor sínn, ok sagðe <anchor id=a586.1><pb id=pb586 n=586><note place=margin>[290: 24.]</note>hónom sína f&aolig;r slíka sem veret hafðe. Ioan mælte: &lsquo;Ecki geck <anchor id=a586.2>þetta fiarre mínne ætlan.&rsquo; Hann var þá spurðr, hví hann hió eige <anchor id=a586.3>framm &oelig;xenne. Hann sagðe stirðna handleggena frá því er <anchor id=a586.4>biskop leit til hans, ok til þess er hann kom í kirkjona, svá (<hi>at</hi>) <anchor id=a586.5>hann mátti eige framm reiða &oelig;xena.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p n=6.3><anchor id=a586.6><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Ioan Loftz son leggr þá eige niðr upp tekenn ó-þocka, heldr <anchor id=a586.7>kallar hann menn at ser, ok ætlar þann dag sem biskop ríðr frá <anchor id=a586.8>Fellz-múla til Leiro-backa, at sitja firer hónom þar sem nú heiter <anchor id=a586.9>Vatz-hlíð, ok setr menn hváro-megin vatz-vegarens hiá garðenom. <anchor id=a586.10>Biskop hafðe af V&aolig;llom riðet til Fellz-múla. Kom þesse til-ætlan<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a586.11>Ioans firer biskop ok hans menn; ok báðo menn hann ríða aðra <anchor id=a586.12>leið, at eige bære funde þeirra saman. En hann sialfr var &oelig;ruggr <anchor id=a586.13>um sik, ok gerðe aðra út af ser &oelig;rugga; ok hvárke óttaðez hann <anchor id=a586.14>mann-fiolða né vápna-búnað, ok reið ó-skialfande til firer-búenna <anchor id=a586.15>firer-sátra. En Allz-valldande Guð leidde enn sem fyrr þoko ifer<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a586.16>þann veg, sem hann fór ok hans menn; þó svá at þeir fáto<note place=apparatus id=an586.1><ab type=lineNumRef>16.</ab> fötuðu, Cd.</note> vel veg <anchor id=a586.17>sínn, siánde sína umsátar-menn; en þeir Ioan ok hans menn sá <anchor id=a586.18>eige biskop, né hans menn, ok eige veg sínn, fyrr en biskop ok <anchor id=a586.19>hans menn vóro komner ór augsýn. Reið<note place=apparatus id=an586.2><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Reið]</ab> emend.; Beið, Cd.</note> biskop þann dag, sem <anchor id=a586.20>hann hafðe ætlat, ok var um nóttena í Leiro-backa<note place=apparatus id=an586.3><ab type=lineNumRef>20.</ab> <ab type=textRef>í Leiro-b.]</ab> om. Cd.</note> í góðom<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a586.21>fagnaðe.

<p n=6.4><anchor id=a586.22><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Úm morgonenn veit Ioan, at biskop mune ríða til Ytra-Skarðz; <anchor id=a587.1><pb id=pb587 n=587><note place=margin>[291: 24.]</note>ætlar hann þá enn firer hónom at sitja, eige á veg, heldr <anchor id=a587.2>við bæenn á Skarðe. Skipar nú svá til, at frá Baðz-garðe upp <anchor id=a587.3>frá Klofa skal geilar g&oelig;ra af m&aolig;nnom heim at kirkjo-garðz-hliðe: <anchor id=a587.4>skal Ioan þar í standa; en biskop skal eige til bæjar komaz, útan <anchor id=a587.5>hann ríðe þessar geilar; ok eige í kirkjo-garðenn nema þar sem<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a587.6>Ioan er firer. Ok er morgin kemr, þá ferr þesse ætlan framm. <anchor id=a587.7>En áðr en biskop ríðr af Leiro-backa, þá verðr hann víss þessarar <anchor id=a587.8>til-tekjo Ioans. Ok er þeir komo framm at Bað-garðe<note place=apparatus id=an587.1><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Bað-g.]</ab> thus here.</note>, siá menn <anchor id=a587.9>biskops tvennar skipaner marg-mennes þess er þeim er ætlað í <anchor id=a587.10>mille at ríða; ok nema staðar. Biskop kom skiótt efter, ok bað<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a587.11>þá ecki óttaz, &lsquo;þvi at til mín, en eige til yðar, er siá leikr g&oelig;rr.&rsquo; <anchor id=a587.12>Hann ríðr fyrstr framm í kvína, ok næst hónom Ormr prestr <anchor id=a587.13>capalín hans, ok þar efter hverr at &aolig;ðrom, til þess er biskop kom <anchor id=a587.14>at kirkjo-garðz-hliðe, þar sem Ioan var firer, ok steig af bake. <anchor id=a587.15>Eige var kostr í hliðet at ganga, þvi at þat var fullt af m&aolig;nnom:<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a587.16>eige var ok kostr í braut at snúa, þvi at fiolmenne þr&oelig;ngðe at <anchor id=a587.17>&aolig;llom-megen. Ecki varð af kveðjom. Biskop mælte: &lsquo;Hvárt <anchor id=a587.18>hyggr þú, Ioan, at banna mer kirkjo?&rsquo; Ioan svarar: &lsquo;Þat mun <anchor id=a587.19>under yðr vera.&rsquo; Biskop mælte: &lsquo;Svá sýnez mer nú, sem þú <anchor id=a587.20>muner ráða vilja at sinne; en forvitnar mik hví þú g&oelig;rer þetta.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a587.21>Ioan svarar: &lsquo;Þér hafet bannat mer kirkjo langan tíma, ok heiteð <anchor id=a587.22>at bann-færa mik; firer því vilda-ek at svá bære ockra funde <anchor id=a588.1><pb id=pb588 n=588><note place=margin>[292: 24.]</note>saman, at ek ætta meira under mer en yðr.&rsquo; Biskop mælte: &lsquo;Satt <anchor id=a588.2>er þat, at ek hefe lýst forboðom ifer þer firer sannar saker; en <anchor id=a588.3>frestað firer því bannz áfelle, at ek vánaða, <hi>at</hi> þú munder vizko til <anchor id=a588.4>hafa at ganga ór þíno vandræðe; en ef þú gerer þat eige, máttú <anchor id=a588.5>til víst<note place=apparatus id=an588.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> <ab type=textRef>til víst]</ab> thus.</note> vita, at ek mun eige fresta at bann-setja þik; ok munde<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a588.6>betr at fyrr hefðe veret.&rsquo; &lsquo;Veit-ek,&rsquo; sagðe Ioan, &lsquo;at bann þítt er <anchor id=a588.7>rétt, ok s&aolig;ken gnóg; mun-ek þola þín um-mæle með því móte, <anchor id=a588.8>at fara í Þórs-m&aolig;rk, eðr í einhvern þann stað, er eige sekezf <anchor id=a588.9>alþýða af sam-neyte við mik; ok vera þar hiá kono þeirre sem ér <anchor id=a588.10>vandlæteð um, þann tíma sem mer líkar; ok ecki mun bann yð<hi>v</hi>art<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a588.11>skilja mik frá vandræðom mínom, né nockors mannz nauðung, til <anchor id=a588.12>þess er Guð andar því í brióst mer, at skiljaz viljande við þau. En <anchor id=a588.13>hygget svá yðvart efne, at ek ætla svá til at haga, at þer veiteð eige <anchor id=a588.14>fleirom m&aolig;nnom þetta embætte en mer.&rsquo; Biskop varð við þesse <anchor id=a588.15> orð hlióðr um stunder saker. En at lyktom mælte hann: &lsquo;Ek em<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a588.16>búenn firer þetta mál, at þola allt þat sem mer má í koma: g&oelig;r <anchor id=a588.17>hvat er þú vilt, þvi at ek em búenn at láta bannet eige undan líða, <anchor id=a588.18>saker hugleyses firer heitan þína.&rsquo; Ioan svarar: &lsquo;Ef þú ætlar svá <anchor id=a588.19>at g&oelig;ra sem þú talar, mun-ek eige hætta til fleire funda ockarra.&rsquo; <anchor id=a588.20>En þó at Ioan mælte slíkt, brá biskop ser með engo móte við: en<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a588.21>Ormr prestr, sá er næstr hónom stóð, sá at Ioan munde eige mýkja <anchor id=a588.22>reiðe sína; ok þeir sem áðr h&aolig;fðo veret íllz eggjande, þeir mundo <anchor id=a589.1><pb id=pb589 n=589><note place=margin>[292: 24.]</note>búner til at full-gera þat sem heiteð var; hlióp hann framm firer <anchor id=a589.2>biskop, ok mælte: &lsquo;Ek sære yðr, mínn herra, firer nafn várs herra <anchor id=a589.3>Iesu Christi, at eige steypeð ér banne ifer Ioan ok systor yðra at <anchor id=a589.4>þesso sinne, heldr bíðe ér ef at sú stund mætte koma, er Ioan dró <anchor id=a589.5>í ván, at hann mynde skilja sik sialfr frá henne, ok take af yðr<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a589.6>um-bót. Hygget at, herra, ef yðr þicker mikel niðran ger kirkjonne <anchor id=a589.7>at þesse bið-stund<note place=apparatus id=an589.1><ab type=lineNumRef>7.</ab> Emend.; þessum bið-stole, Cd.</note>, at meire niðran er henne, at missa yckar beggja <anchor id=a589.8>á einom dege; þvi at Ioan mun &oelig;ruggr at láta þat statt, sem hann <anchor id=a589.9>heitr góðo. Líteð á, þó at ér legget líkama yðarn í hætto firer <anchor id=a589.10>Guðs saker, at eige bætez enn léttare glæprenn, þó at enn þyngre<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a589.11>fare epter; ok betra er góðs at bíða með þolin-mæðe, en auka <anchor id=a589.12>vandræðe.&rsquo; Biskop leit í fyrsto ú-blíðlega til hans; en af þvi at <anchor id=a589.13>marger studdo hans erende, mælte hann: &lsquo;Enn er sem fyrr, at þú, <anchor id=a589.14>Ioan, ætlar at ráða, þótt þú viler verr; en ef ek vissa at dv&aolig;len <anchor id=a589.15>kæme til góðs, mynda-ek á hána hætta.&rsquo; Aller þeir sem við vóro<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a589.16>urðo því fegner, at hann sagðe ván, at hann mynde fresta banneno, <anchor id=a589.17>ok forðaðez biskop svá lífs-háska. Efter þat var Ioan at spurðr <anchor id=a589.18>nær um-bóten<note place=apparatus id=an589.2><ab type=lineNumRef>18.</ab> um-bötun, Cd.</note> skilde framm koma, sú er hann hefðe í ván dreget, <anchor id=a589.19>ef biskop frestaðe banneno. Ioan seger: &lsquo;Hlíta<note place=apparatus id=an589.3><ab type=lineNumRef>19.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hlíta]</ab> emend.; heita, Cd.</note> hlýtr biskop bið-stundenne, <anchor id=a589.20>ef atg&oelig;rða-laust skal vera, en ek mun ráða verða fram-kvæmðenne.&rsquo;<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a589.21>At lyktom verðr sá ender á þessom funde, at biskop <anchor id=a589.22>hét at auka eige stríðo við Ioan um stundar saker; en Ioan lét <anchor id=a589.23>biskop ná kirkjo, ok reið í brott.

<pb id=pb590 n=590><note place=margin>[293: 25.]</note>

<p n=6.5><anchor id=a590.1><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Efter þat liðo fáer mánoðer, áðr Ioan sagðe Ragneiðe ser <anchor id=a590.2>afhenda; ok tóko þau lausn ok skrift af biskope. En nockoro <anchor id=a590.3>síðarr var Ragneiðr gift Aust-manne þeim sem Arnþórr hét; ok <anchor id=a590.4>kom frá þeim mart manna. En biskop skilðe með þeim Ioane <anchor id=a590.5>alla stund lífs síns, at þau skilde enga funde eiga né viðr-tal, nema<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a590.6>firer vitnom ok í opinberom st&aolig;ðom. Varð aldrege &aolig;ðro-víse en <anchor id=a590.7>ú-blítt með þeim biskope ok Ioane meðan þeir lifðo báðer. En <anchor id=a590.8>Þórsteinn, son Ioans, en vega vilde Þorlák biskop, sem fyrr seger, <anchor id=a590.9>varð enn meste ú-gifto-maðr, svá at faðer hans ok bræðr h&aolig;fðo <anchor id=a590.10>þar af langa skap-raun.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p n=6.6><anchor id=a590.11><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> Ioan Loftz son lét nockoro síðarr en þesser atburðer gerðoz, <anchor id=a590.12>smíða kirkjo ok klaustr-hús firer norðan læk at Keldom, ok ætlaðe <anchor id=a590.13>sialfr í at ganga: en enger urðo menn til ráðner. En þann tíma <anchor id=a590.14>er Þorlákr biskop heyrðe pata á þesso, spurðe hann, svá sem <anchor id=a590.15>ó-vitande, hvárt Ioan ætlaðe claustr at reisa at Keldom. Hónom<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a590.16>vas sagt at þat være satt. Hann spurðe enn: &lsquo;Hverjom ætlar <anchor id=a590.17>hann helgom manne at gefa claustret?&rsquo; Þeir sem hiá hónom vóro, <anchor id=a590.18>s&aolig;gðo, at hann ætlaðe at gefa claustret Iohanne Baptista. Biskop <anchor id=a590.19>mælte þá: &lsquo;Þat ero mikel undr, ef hann vill þiggja þat sem hefer <anchor id=a590.20>þar saman boret, svá sem hann hefer til aflat.&rsquo; Urðo þesse orð<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a590.21>eige at lok-leyso; þvi at þá er Ioan kom til Keldna, tók hann bráð&shy;lega <anchor id=a590.22>sótt; ok er at hónom tók at draga, lét hann leiða sik út í dyrr. <anchor id=a590.23>Ok er hann sá til kirkjonnar, mælte hann: &lsquo;Þar stendr þú, kirkja <anchor id=a590.24>mín, þú harmar mik, en ek harma þik.&rsquo; Þóttez hann þá siá, at <anchor id=a591.1><pb id=pb591 n=591><note place=margin>[293: 25.]</note>ó-vís var upp-reist hennar, ef hann kallaðe frá. Efter dauða <anchor id=a591.2>hans lét Sæmundr, sonr hans, um sína daga bæta fyrnd kirkjonnar <anchor id=a591.3>ok húsanna. En at hónom liðnom skifto syner hans kirkjonne ok <anchor id=a591.4>húsonom ofan-teknom, sem sínom f&aolig;ðor-arfe. Ok kómo þá framm <anchor id=a591.5>fyr-greind orð ens heilaga Þorláks biskops.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<!-- BEGIN OF TRANSLATED TEXT OF SECOND LIFE OF THORLAC -->


<div2 id=en.secondlife lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">

<p n=0.2.3 rend="class(small)"><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> It is also to be particularly said that lord Eystan the archbishop made known to him his message with letters to Iceland, that all church lands that were of old custom held by laymen should now all be under the power of the bishop, according to the directions, as he said, which the rules of the apostles and the ordinances of the holy fathers bore witness to. Moreover, with regard to this message which he <pb id=pb570a n=570>thus went into, he gave him his letters patent to follow up the rights of the Church over all the bishopric of Scal-holt, which thing the newly-hallowed bishop the holy Thor-lac took up and discussed and brought over and set forth as shall be later declared particularly in this story.


<p n=1.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>1.</hi> 1.</ab> When the holy bishop Thor-lac had sat one winter in his see [1179], he started on his visitation the next summer to the East-friths, and when he was come to the south over Loon-peak-sand he took guest-quarters at Swine-fell. Sig-urd, Orm&apos;s son, was dwelling there at that time, a man of mark, of worldly pride, wealthy, and of high kindred. The lord bishop was welcomed there as was meet. But because the franklin wished to have a church consecrated there, the bishop called him to talk with him on the morrow after, and set forth the message of archbishop Ey-stan, wherein he had bidden him to gather into his hands all the churches and all the property of the churches within his bishopric. Sig-urd would not hear of this, and said that he would not consent to give up what he had freely held aforetime under the law of the land and of ancient use. The bishop said, that the ordinance of the apostles themselves gave him power over all that belonged to God without any distinction. &lsquo;The holy fathers of the Church, and the <pb id=pb571a n=571>popes the successors of the apostles, have bidden and ordained the same throughout all Christendom in the canon law: and now the pope hath also bidden archbishop Ey-stan to carry out the same rule in Norway, and it hath been accepted there. Wherefore it is neither lawful nor is it to be borne that this poor country should not stand under the same law as holdeth good there.&rsquo; Sig-urd answers that &lsquo;North-men or aliens cannot by their consent take our rights from us.&rsquo; Then the bishop answered, &lsquo;The provision that uninformed men have established here, in reserving to themselves the power over those things that they had aforetime given to God, is of no force by virtue of the laws themselves, and ought not to be held good, and wheresoever this case is brought to law before the bishops such [as have done this] are not in the number of them that have a good hope of salvation, since they stand fast in their hardness of heart; and all they that do stubbornly withhold tithes or that which appertaineth to the saints, ought to be excommunicated after lawful admonitions, if they will not be reconciled and desist from their wrong-doings.&rsquo;

<p n=1.1.1>Now the day was wearing on, so that the franklin could see that the consecration of the church could not take place except he gave up his case, wherefore he turned to the right way and gave up the charter of endowment of the church, and the church itself into the hands of the bishop. Then the bishop consecrated the church and sang mass. And after the mass he gave the church-stead to Sig-urd in fee for a term, and Sig-urd consented to hold it of him.

<p n=1.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Then the bishop went thence to Red-beck, where Orm the Old dwelt, and there he put forth the same claim as at Swine-fell. And it <pb id=pb572a n=572>went much the same way by Orm giving up the dominion of the church to the bishop and the bishop giving it to him in fee, and they parted friends.

<p n=1.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Thence bishop Thor-lac went to the East-friths with the same intent, and most of them that held church lands gave him the same answer.  And albeit many were slow to consent to give up their own heritage, yet it all came to this, that bishop Thor-lac got the dominion over all the church lands east of Heor-laf&apos;s head, save on Thwart-water and Hall-orms-stead; and so it hath been ever since.



<p n=2.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>2.</hi> 1.</ab> At that time John Loft&apos;s son ruled in Ord. Now he was the greatest chief in Iceland; he was a gode-hood&apos;s man <hi>or</hi> gode; he was a man very wise in all clerkly skill, which he had gotten from his forbears. He was a deacon hallowed, a great chaunter in Holy Church. Moreover he ever set his heart greatly on this, that the churches that he had in his dominion should be the best fitted up in every way. He was a man full of well-nigh every kind of accomplishments that were fashionable by men in those days. He was a man of so great pride, and one that stood so by his rights that scarce any other man of his day did so more, for he would never give way to anybody or withdraw from any matter that he once took up. He had a wife whose name was Hall-dora, and she was the daughter of Brand; their son was Sæ-mund.

<p n=2.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> John was greatly given up to the love of women, insomuch that he had many other sons by sundry women&mdash;Thor-stan and Hall-beorn, and Sig-urd and Einar. Moreover, Paul that was afterwards bishop, and <pb id=pb573a n=573>Orm that afterwards dwelt at Broad-bowster were the sons of him and of Rag-neid Thor-kal&apos;s daughter, the sister to bishop Thor-lac. John and she had loved each other from their youth up. Nevertheless she had borne children to other men. They were fully grown, Paul and Orm, the sons of John and Rag-neid, by the time that bishop Thor-lac came to Iceland in the office of bishop. Paul dwelt at Utter-Scard and Orm at Broad-bowster. John was used to keep Rag-neid at home with him at Ord for long together.

<p n=2.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> In those days John had come to own Head-brink-land, which was thought to be one of the very best of estates till Head-river spoiled it. A south-west storm had broken down two churches there, and John had had one new church built in their stead, right fairly wrought, and the holy bishop Thor-lac was to take up his guest-quarters there that same harvest when he came from the East-friths, as was said before. It was intended that he should consecrate the church there. There was a seemly feast made there for him, and at the day that was set the bishop came thither with his following. John was there to meet him and many other men of mark.

<p n=2.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> In the morning the bishop made ready to consecrate the church, and John and they that were of one mind with him went to the bishop, and they talked over the terms of the charter of the church [as was the use]. The lord bishop, being bound to follow up the rights of the Church, asked whether John had heard the archbishop&apos;s message with regard to the possessions of the Church. John answered, &lsquo;I am willing to hear the archbishop&apos;s message, but I am steadfastly minded to pay no heed to <pb id=pb574a n=574>it at all, for I do not think that he wills or knows better than my forbears, Sæ-mund the historian and his sons. Nor am I minded to make of no account the doings of our bishops here in this country, in that they paid heed to the law of the land, that laymen should have power over the churches that their forbears gave to God, reserving to themselves and their issue the right over them.&rsquo; The bishop answered with the same reasons as were read above, and with many more, saying, &lsquo;Thou knowest this well, John, if thou wilt stand by the right, that the bishop hath right over the church lands and tithes, according to the ordinances of the apostles and the other holy fathers. And inasmuch as laymen cannot have any right over these things, therefore they can never get freehold of these things by the title of ancient use. I trust that the rulers of the churches that have been before us, will be greatly excused by reason of its never having been commanded them by their superiors to call the churches and tithes into their own hand.... Wherefore they are to be excommunicated that hold stubbornly to the tithes or God&apos;s lands against the will and consent of the bishops.&rsquo; John answered, &lsquo;Ye may call him excommunicate whom ye will, but I will never consent to give up into your hands what is mine, be it small church or great, of those which I have rights over.&rsquo;

<p n=2.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Moreover there was another point at issue between them arising out of the outburst of Head-river, inasmuch as it had swept away many homesteads that belonged to that estate, and those too upon which the churches stood, whereby the tithe was lessened, and there were fewer houses for outlying services. Wherefore John wished that there should <pb id=pb575a n=575>be no more than one priest and one deacon for the [new] church, but before there had been two priests and two deacons. The lord bishop allowed himself to be persuaded thereto for this same reason [of the loss of land, etc.]. But on the former point each man held to his claim, and the day was wearing far on. But they who gave themselves out as friends of both prayed the bishop to abate somewhat of his claim, and all the gathering drew that way, following the old evil ways. But when bishop Thor-lac saw this, that he could not for the time establish his claim, these words broke from his mouth, &lsquo;Though it is not to be borne, if the matter come before lawful judges, that thou should draw the rights of the Church to thyself and from the bishops, according to the custom of the country, yet it is much less to be borne that the bishops should not take from thee thy harlots whom thou keepest clean against all the custom of the country. Yet it may be that thou shalt have thy way in the greater matter, if thou have thy way in the lesser, nevertheless thou art in the wrong way.&rsquo;

<p>Men believe that bishop Thor-lac spake these words because he found that the multitude followed John with regard to the matter of the Church, and that he gave way for the time because he perceived that he would get no profit thereof, even if he stood to his case, but rather great damage in many ways; moreover it was his hope, by the archbishop&apos;s help, that the Church should afterwards get her rights. But from the place whence he looked for comfort to come there came grievous tidings, for a little later archbishop Ey-stan was driven out of his country for matters of church right. And all men here in our country thought that they could do according as was done in Norway.

<pb id=pb576a n=576><p n=2.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> That day the bishop consecrated the church and sang mass, though he gat no furtherance in what he wished. He was ill pleased with the issue of the case, for all the others did afterwards according to the example of John, and none of them would give his church right up to bishop Thor-lac, whereby this whole claim fell to the ground as long as he lived.

<p n=2.7><ab type=parNum>7.</ab> Many things happened in the days of bishop Thor-lac that are worthy of high report, albeit but few are touched on here, for he suffered all manner of toil and afflictions from divers calamities by reason of the wickedness and disobedience of them that were under him, as may be heard from the incidents that here follow:&mdash;



<p n=3.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>3.</hi> 1.</ab> There was a man named Hogne that dwelt at By in Burg-frith. He was the son of Thor-mod, a man hallowed priest and very wealthy, but of low birth. His wife&apos;s name was Gar-laug, and she was the daughter of Arne. Ey-wolf the Staf-holt-man had their daughter to wife. He was a very rich man. A second daughter of Hogne was Snæ-laug. She abode at home unwedded. She gave birth to a child that was put down to a workman of her father&apos;s, whose name was Gunnar, and was called &lsquo;Neat-tyke.&rsquo; Hogne was just as well pleased with his daughter for all this, and did not hold up his daughter a whit less than he had before.

<p n=3.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Now it came about that Snæ-laug was staying at Sowerby in Whale-frith-strand. There Thord the priest, the son of Bead-war o&apos; Garth in Acre-ness, was well pleased with her, and his heart was moved towards the woman. So he and his father went to By, and asked Hogne to give her to Thord to wife. The bargain was struck. <pb id=pb577a n=577>Thord took Snæ-laug to wife. They loved each other dearly, and had a son together. There was a man named Hran, the son of Her-mund, who was then dwelling at Gils-bank. He had been in fosterage with Hogne at the time when Snæ-laug had a bastard child. He had gone abroad, and the news of his death was now heard from Norway. And when Hogne and Snæ-laug got the news, she said that he [Hran] had been the father of her daughter Gud-run, but that she had not dared to acknowledge it because of the power of Her-mund her father. And when this was become known everywhere, Thord and Hran proved to be fourth cousins.

<p n=3.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> And when bishop Thor-lac was aware thereof, he forbad Thord and Snæ-laug to live together. But inasmuch as they loved each other dearly they gave little heed to what he said. After that he put them under prohibition, and at last he excommunicated them. Moreover the bishop himself went up to the Rock of Laws at the All-moot, and proclaimed that he declared the marriage that had been between them to be sundered, and declared their children that were born to them after the lawful impediment was known to be bastards. Thord and Hogne were very ill-pleased with this, so that they paid back full enmity against the bishop in return for his wholesome exhortation and rebuke, and they brought over men to them to set up strife against him.

<p n=3.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Hogne had been out to Norway for a shipload of timber, and had had a church built [therewith] at By. There had no more priest-hire been paid before than twelve ounces. Hogne lost his cure because of his betrayal of duty in that he had brought about this unlawful wedlock, and for holding with his son-in-law and daughter against the bishop in this <pb id=pb578a n=578>case. Bishop Thor-lac often mooted this, that he was minded to consecrate the church at By. But inasmuch as Hogne knew that the bishop claimed to own right and power over all the church land, therefore he refused outright to let the church be dedicated at all as long as he had a voice in the matter, lest the bishop should ever get the power over it, saying that that church should be the noblest stable in Iceland if he was not to have his own way in the other matter. But the bishop refused these terms and would not withhold his righteous rebuke, showing himself thereby to be no reed-wand of weakness, but a fearless follower of truth. Nor did he fear the threats and hoots of these priests.



<p n=4.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>4.</hi> 1.</ab> The aforenamed Ey-jolf turned altogether against the bishop because of his kin by marriage, and also because the bishop had a grave charge against him for the matter of women. There was also a lawsuit between them, because the bishop thought that Ey-jolf had wrongful possession of the land at Staff-holt, so that the men of that hundred established <hi>or</hi> set him down there without the ruling of the bishop, although priest Stane had not given the estate as an inheritance, but reserved maintenance for two helpless women of his family for ever. Now because the bishop would not be softened, Thord and Snæ-laug went and made peace with him, so to speak, and got quit-claims and writings from him. The shares and parting between them was [settled] in this way&mdash;that Thord should be at Garth and keep his own goods, but Snæ-laug [was to be] at By with her pence. But Thord kept his engagement no better than this, that he and she lived together for months at a time, and had three sons&mdash;Thor-laf, Mark, and Bead-war. They were sometimes reconciled with the bishop and sometimes under his prohibition.

<pb id=pb579a n=579><p n=4.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> The case of the church made no way, and once upon a time when the bishop was riding over the country side, Ey-jolf lay in wait for him at Grim&apos;s-river, and caught hold of the reins of his horse and would not let him go on. The bishop would not speak to him because he was under a grave charge. Then Ey-jolf said, &lsquo;This is my errand here, that I will have thee lawfully make over to me <hi>or</hi> handsel me self-doom <hi>or</hi> the right of settling the matter for thy two clerks against whom my sons-in-law the Men o&apos; By have actions of seduction to sue on behalf of franklins&apos; daughters of their kin, and now I have taken up this case for them.&rsquo; The bishop did not answer. Then Ey-jolf grew very angry, and said, &lsquo;Ye shall not go away unhurt save ye handsel me self-doom.&rsquo; A certain man whose name was Thor-laf, and who was called &lsquo;Beiscalde,&rsquo; that dwelt at Hot-river-dale, was in company with the bishop. He saw that it looked as if things would go badly, and he rode forth to Ey-jolf and said, &lsquo;Wilt thou have me handsel thee self-doom, and do thou let the bishop go free?&rsquo; Said Ey-jolf, &lsquo;Thy deed is not the bishop&apos;s deed; I have no case against thee.&rsquo; Said Thor-laf, &lsquo;Many a man would be glad to have my handsel, and if thou wilt not take it, then thou shalt not hurt the bishop before thou shalt hurt me&rsquo; [i.e. &lsquo;I will make the bishop&apos;s case mine&rsquo;]. Then Ey-jolf took the offer, and straightway laid the damage at 500 morat-ware [dark undyed wadmal] for each clerk, and with that they parted. But from this time forward naught went well or prosperously with Ey-jolf. He lost his money, and he and his goodwife did not live long. His son Are was stricken with leprosy, and Olof his daughter became half-witted, and he gave over to Snorre Sturlason his rectory with the consent of Snæ-laug o&apos; By, but <pb id=pb580a n=580>in return Snorre was to give him in marriage and find her a dowry. But the marriage never took place, and she had children by land-lopers.

<p n=4.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Once upon a time the holy bishop Thor-lac was a guest at Reek-holt with Magnus the priest. He rode with a company of men southward under Mull-fell with the lord bishop, and at their parting he said, &lsquo;I know that this day ye will need help, wherefore I have brought many men with me, and I will follow you until I know that ye are out of jeopardy.&rsquo; Said the bishop, &lsquo;Whence will it come?&rsquo; Magnus answered, &lsquo;I have heard that Hogne o&apos; By is ill-pleased that ye have grave charges against his sons-in-law, Thord and Ey-jolf, and that ye will not consecrate his church except ye make your own terms in the charter, and he believes that the law of the land is broken to his hurt. Wherefore I believe that he means you to be a guest at By to-night and not at Sower-by, as ye had meant.&rsquo; The bishop answered, &lsquo;Have [my] thanks for thy following and faithfulness, but do thou ride home, and farewell. Our way is in God&apos;s hands, and the Men o&apos; By will not do me any harm.&rsquo; Magnus answered, &lsquo;It shall be as ye will, but I wished to tell you what to be most ware of, and put my following under your orders.&rsquo; The bishop answers, &lsquo;Farewell, friend. God will keep us.&rsquo; Then the Reek-holt-men rode home, but the bishop went on to Grim&apos;s-river; but under the sand-bank by that river over against the ford that is called Stone&apos;s-wade, Hogne and his sons-in-law were lying in wait, and many men with them. But as soon as the bishop and his men came into the dip, Hogne&apos;s men rode out and stopped their path. The bishop asked why they did so. Priest Hogne rode forth and said, <pb id=pb581a n=581>&lsquo;Now I mean that thou shouldst consecrate the church at By, and turn hence with me.&rsquo; The bishop answered, &lsquo;I had meant to go to Sower-by, and not to By.&rsquo; Said Hogne, &lsquo;I must have my way now, and there is no second choice.&rsquo; Bishop Thor-lac would not push it so far as to be made prisoner, but rather went with the company of his enemies and stayed that night at By, but his heart never bent at their threat, but he went away in peace with the free consent of his enemies, inasmuch as they saw that he was ready to undergo any affliction rather than abate the right by any kind of <corr sic=faintheartedness>faint-heartedness</corr> or cowardice. His very opponents found out their own injustice when they saw his steadfastness. And now the wisest men were set to mediate upon the dowry of the church and the office-fee of the priest. The lord bishop perceived that it was of more worth that many men and those of great worship, that had up to this time been the opponents of the church, should become her friends, even though Hogne had got his prayer in this matter, that the church should rather have the outlying land rather than the home land, as long as the church got her full moneys in amount. And now they came on both sides&mdash;Ey-jolf and Hogne and Thord and Snæ-laug&mdash;and got absolution. After that the bishop went back to By, and there was a fair banquet there made for him, and there was a great company and entertainment enough. The bishop consecrated the church according to the charter which Hogne and the bishop had agreed on. On the last day of the feast Hogne gave the bishop seemly gifts, and they parted in friendship. Thence bishop Thor-lac went to Staff-holt, and <pb id=pb582a n=582>then Ey-jolf gave the bishop up the claim for the money which Thor-laf had handselled for him. The lord bishop went home that harvest. The lord bishop made peace with these men in order to lessen the danger [of feud], but on neither side was there a full understanding with the other.

<p n=4.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> Many men made great opposition to bishop Thor-lac, but some were more open about it than others, because they held it to be hard-hearted and merciless in him towards the people that he rebuked them for their evil ways and the open sins of wicked men, and constrained with the power and severity of Holy Church them that would not turn to good ways at his comfortable admonitions.



<p n=5.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>5.</hi> 1.</ab> Swain [the Unlucky] was the name of a man, the son of Sturla o&apos; Hwam, a riotous and wicked man. This man took to his bed a near kinswoman of his wife. He dwelt in Northern Reek-frith at Strands, in the West-frith Quarter. The blessed bishop Thor-lac was much displeased with this misconduct of his, and rebuked him, first with exhortations and admonitions, and afterwards with prohibition and excommunication, because Swain grew the more hardened in his wickedness the more often the bishop admonished him to better his ways.

<p n=5.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And at the time that the holy bishop Thor-lac went into this Quarter, this same Swain gathered a gang to lie in ambush for the bishop. They set out from home and on to the road by which they thought the bishop would ride, but when they were come awhile from the homestead there came a fog upon them so that they could not see <pb id=pb583a n=583>the way. And when they had gone on a long time they lay down on the place they had reached by reason of the darkness, but the bishop and his men rode the while in bright weather. But by the time that so many men had gone to meet the bishop that Swain had no company to match them, the darkness cleared, and they could now see that they had gone astray, and also that the bishop had ridden by so that they had no power over him. Then each man charged the other with losing the way, and out of this dispute there sprang up such a curse upon them that they came to blows, and Swain slew a man named Erne hard by the hot spring that is there in the firth. Swain and his companions got speedy and fit retribution for this wish of his to put compulsion upon the man of God. But the bishop and his men went freely on their way according to their will.



<p n=6.1><ab type=parNum><hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 1.</ab> The lord bishop Thor-lac charged many things against John Loft&apos;s son of Ord, both for his adulteries and his wrongful gains, and especially because he kept his [Thor-lac&apos;s] sister Ragn-eid at home with him in flat defiance and disobedience in the lifetime of his wife. But although John answered somewhat moderately with regard to the other charges of the bishop, yet he would not come to any reconciliation which should make him part with Ragn-eid. At last it came to this that the bishop put him under prohibition. John was very grieved to suffer compulsion from the bishop, both because of his pride and also because many took an ill part in the questions between them, and especially Thor-stan his son, that dwelt at Gunnere&apos;s-holt. He egged on his father with unheard-of folly to outrage the bishop, but John meant then as before <pb id=pb584a n=584>to make the bishop flinch by a show of violence rather than take weapons against him.

<p n=6.2><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> And once upon a time when bishop Thor-lac was going on a visitation of his diocese, and his path lay over against the homestead at Ord, John thought to take the bishop prisoner and force him to his will, as he had done with many men. He set men on both sides of the passes that lie east of the homestead, thinking the bishop must go by there, for he was riding down from the Islands and up Wrang-water-fields. But when they had crossed East Wrang-water, it seemed to them at Ord as if a thick fog came up out of the sea, so that scarce anything could be seen, and it lasted till the bishop and his men were out of sight. But they that were in the ambush thought that the bishop must have gone by another road. They that followed the bishop could see clearly men sitting on either side of the passes, but inasmuch as they did not know what it was for they went on without dread because the others offered them no hurt. But when John perceived that his plan had broken down, he rode out with certain men over his lands by another way, keeping up with the bishop to the same intent. And yet he complained the while to his friends, asking them what he was to do with regard to the harsh treatment that he thought he was getting from the bishop. His son Thor-stan was hard by him at the time, and he said, &lsquo;I will loose this knot, father, and put an end to this bishop that treats men so unjustly.&rsquo; John answered, &lsquo;Thou shalt go and meet the bishop if it like thee, but this piece of mischief will not fall to thee to overcome Thor-lac at all; that will fall to no man but me alone, if I choose to give myself <pb id=pb585a n=585>to so doing.&rsquo; Thor-stan said that he did not believe that, and went forth with certain men, and they came to Fields, where the bishop was sitting at table; and when they saw men come to the door of the house, then they asked where the bishop was, and were told that he was at table. Then Thor-stan fell to mighty threats against the bishop if he were to come out of doors. They that had been to the door went in, and were asked who it was that had come. They said that there were come Thor-stan, John&apos;s son, and men with him fully weaponed, and that Thor-stan was using mighty threats against him if he should go out of doors. The bishop had been told before of what he had said, and of his father&apos;s answer, and also of the whole intent of John. The men of the house hindered the bishop from going out, but he, fearless and unshaken against all danger from wicked men, answered, &lsquo;I will go to church as I am wont to do; this man will not do me any harm.&rsquo; The men of the house said then, &lsquo;Lord, sit in doors and sing on your psalter, and do not venture yourself under the weapons of this man of hell that shrinketh from naught.&rsquo; The bishop answers, &lsquo;I will go as I had meant, but if this man do me any harm ... maybe that I shall not then need any more....&rsquo; After that the bishop went out, and when Thor-stan beheld him he made no more ado but caught up his axe, but it was not granted to him to strike him, for he could not deal a stroke, but felt that God&apos;s power had hindered him. Meanwhile the bishop looked at him, but did not speak, and walked on to the church as he had meant. Thor-stan went to meet his father, and told him of his journey how it <pb id=pb586a n=586>had gone with him. Said John, &lsquo;It did not go much otherwise than I supposed it would.&rsquo; Then he was asked why he had not cut at him with the axe. He said that his arm was stiffened from the time the bishop looked at him until he got into the church, so that he could not deal a stroke at him with the axe.

<p n=6.3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Nevertheless John Loft&apos;s son did not put away the enmity that he had undertaken, but on the contrary he called his men about him, and laid a plan on the day that the bishop was riding from Fell&apos;s-mull to Clay-bank to sit in ambush for him at the place that is now called Water-lithe, and he set men on both sides of the water-course hard by the garth there. The bishop had ridden from the Fields to Fell&apos;s-mull. This intent of John&apos;s reached the bishop and his men, and they prayed him to ride another way that they might not fall in with one another. But he himself was fearless about himself, and he made the others fearless through his example, for he neither shrunk from the multitude of men nor the weapons, but rode unshaken to the men that were ready lying in wait for him. But Almighty God spread a fog once more as [He had done] before over the road that he and his men journeyed by, in such wise that they could find their way well and see them that lay in wait for them, while John and his men could not see the bishop or his men nor the way before the bishop and his men had got out of sight. The bishop rode on that day as he had meant, and was that night at Clay-bank, where he was welcome.

<p n=6.4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> On the morrow it was made known to John that the bishop was <pb id=pb587a n=587>about to ride to Utter Scard, and he thereupon laid a plan to wait for him, not on the road but right up at the homestead at Scard. Accordingly he arranged so that from Bath&apos;s-garth up to Clove there should be a lane of men on each side right up to the churchyard-gate. There John himself was to stand, so that the bishop should not be able to get to the homestead save he rode through this lane of men, and could not get into the churchyard save he came face to face with John. And when the morning came then it was done according to his intent. But before the bishop rode away from Clay-bank he got to know of this device of John&apos;s. And when they got as far as Bath&apos;s-garth the bishop&apos;s men saw the two long lines of men drawn up between which they must ride, and they made a halt. The bishop came up quickly and bade them not be afraid, &lsquo;for this game is set for me and not for you.&rsquo; He rode foremost [of all] into the narrowing lane, and the next man to him was priest Orm his chaplain, and the rest one after another behind him, until the bishop got to the churchyard-gate, where John was standing, and lit off his horse. There was no way of getting into the gate for it was full of men, and there was no way of turning back, for a great multitude of men was closing about them from all sides. There were no greetings passed. The bishop said, &lsquo;What! dost think, John, to forbid me the church?&rsquo; John answers, &lsquo;That depends on you.&rsquo; The bishop said, &lsquo;It seems to me as if thou wouldst have thy way, but I wish to know why thou doest this?&rsquo; John answers, &lsquo;Ye have forbidden me the church for a long time, and thou hast threatened to excommunicate me; therefore I wished to bring about our meeting in such wise, that it <pb id=pb588a n=588>should depend upon myself and not on you.&rsquo; The bishop said, &lsquo;True it is that I have uttered my prohibition against thee for a rightful charge, but I have put off the infliction of my excommunication, because I hoped that thou wouldst have the wisdom to get rid of thy troubles; but if thou do not so, know of a truth that I will not put off excommunicating thee any longer, and it would have been better if it had been done before now.&rsquo; &lsquo;I know,&rsquo; said John, &lsquo;that thy excommunication is lawful, and the charge sufficient; and I am willing to suffer thy sentence in this way, I will go into the desert of Thor&apos;s-mark or into some such place, where the common folk shall not be guilty of conversation with me, and there I will live with the woman whom ye are rebuking me for, and your excommunication shall not part me from my troubles, nor any man&apos;s compulsion, until God breathes into my breast to part willingly with them. But take heed to yourself that I mean to fix matters so that ye shall do this service to no second man after me, <hi>or</hi> that I shall be the last man you serve so.&rsquo; The bishop was silent at these words for awhile, but at last he spoke. &lsquo;I am ready to suffer all that may happen to me in this matter. Do as thou wilt, for I am ready now to lay my ban on thee without further delay for fear of thy threats.&rsquo; Answers John, &lsquo;If thou mean to do as thou sayest, surely I will not risk another meeting between us [i. e. I will slay thee here].&rsquo; But though John said this the bishop did not flinch before him one whit. But Orm the priest that stood next him saw that John would not soften his anger [i. e. was growing more enraged], and that they that had egged him to wickedness before were ready to bring about what he <pb id=pb589a n=589>had threatened. He ran out in front of the bishop, and said, &lsquo;I adjure you, my lord, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, not to let fall thy ban upon John and your sister at this time, but rather do ye wait, if peradventure the hour may come which John gave hope of, when he will himself part from her and take absolution from you. Consider, my lord, if ye think it a great hurt for the church to wait awhile, how much more she will suffer by the loss of both of you in one day; for John will surely make that good which he has clearly promised. Look you, though ye put your body in jeopardy for God&apos;s sake, yet the lighter sin is not thereby atoned for if there follow a heavier sin still, and it is better to wait for good with long-suffering than to increase offences.&rsquo; At first the bishop looked sternly upon him, but because there were many that upheld what he had said, he spake, &lsquo;Now it is as before, thou wilt have thy way, John, though thou art in the wrong, but were I sure that my delay would come to good, I would risk it for all this.&rsquo; All they that were there rejoiced at this, that he gave a hope that he would stay the excommunication, and that so the bishop might escape from the peril of his life. After that John was asked when he would give any such amends as he had given hope of if the bishop would stay the ban. Says John, &lsquo;The bishop must rest satisfied to wait if there is to be no assault, but it must be at my own pleasure to fix the time and way.&rsquo; And the end of their meeting was this, that the bishop promised not to set greater compulsion upon John for awhile, and John let the bishop go to the church, and rode away.

<pb id=pb590a n=590><p n=6.5><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> After this a few months went by, and then John put away Ragn-eid, and they got absolution and shrift from the bishop.  And somewhat later Ragn-eid was given in marriage to an Eastman whose name was Arn-thor, and from them many men have sprung. But the bishop parted John and her all his life, and would not let them meet or speak, save before witnesses and in public places. But there was never much love between the bishop and John as long as they both lived. And as for Thor-stan John&apos;s son that wished to slay bishop Thor-lac, as was aforesaid, he turned out the greatest failure, so that his father and his brothers gat great sorrow by reason of him.

<p n=6.6><ab type=parNum>6.</ab> A little after these things had happened, John Loft&apos;s son had a church and a cloister-house built north of a brook at the Wells, and he meant to enter the cloister himself, but there were no men appointed thereto [as monks]. But when bishop Thor-lac heard a report of this he enquired, as if he had not heard it, whether John was minded to raise a cloister at Wells. He was told that it was true. Then he asked, &lsquo;To what saint does he mean to give the cloister?&rsquo; They that were present said he meant to give the cloister to John the Baptist. The bishop said, &lsquo;It was a great marvel if he accept that which was gathered in the way it was gained.&rsquo; These words were not spoken in vain, for when John came to Wells he was shortly taken ill, and when the illness began to grow upon him he had himself led out of doors, and as he looked towards the church, he said, &lsquo;There thou standest, my church; thou grievest for me, and I grieve for thee.&rsquo; For then he could see that there was little hope of its establishment if he were called away. After <pb id=pb591a n=591>his death his son Sæ-mund in his day kept the church and houses in repair, but when he was gone his sons pulled down the church and houses, and shared them among them as their heritage, and thus was fulfilled that which was foretold in the words of the holy bishop Thor-lac.


</div2>

<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">


<!-- END OF TRANSLATED TEXT -->


<div1 id=s3.6 n=6>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 6.</ab> FRAGMENTS FROM GUNLAUG&apos;S LIFE OF S. JOHN OF HOLAR.</head>

<p>About a century after the former Life of S. John, an ecclesiastic determines to re-edit his Life; he accordingly takes the old Life and amplifies this in the rhetorical style of his own day. And with this Life he inserts (&alpha;) the tale of Gisle Illugeson and the King, a little tale now found in the collections of the Kings&apos; Lives in Hulda and Hrockinskinna; (&beta;) a legend of the Vergilius kind about Sæmund and bishop John, which cannot be earlier than the 14th century; and (&gamma;) besides these he had at his disposal, as he tells us, a Latin Life of S. John by Gunlaug the monk; of this he translated and stuffed into the old Life as much as he could. The difference of style and diction would betray these additions, even if we had not the older Life of S. John to compare them with, and prove them Latin additions. The pieces of this Biography by Gunlaug we have collected and printed together.

<p>It must have been written during the time Gunlaug and bishop Godmund were friends (see Prologue, § 2), that is to say, after 1203 and before 1211. It is marked as Gunlaug&apos;s by the translator and compiler&apos;s adding, <hi>saith Gunlaug who hath composed the Latin History</hi> [of the Bishop], and, <hi>saith brother Gunlaug</hi>, and the like, which leave no doubt.

<p>In my first edition (of 1857) of this Second Life of John, which I printed as it stands in the MS., I believed that Gunlaug had written the whole Second Life, an error here corrected. It is impossible for Gunlaug to have written the Vergil tale, and he was not the man to amplify another man&apos;s writing, while he is always associated, as here, with Latin writings.

<p>The text rests on Holm. No. 5, fol. (described in Introduction to § 3), AM. 219, and the Christiania fragment.

<p>The chronology of the original Biography of S. John has by the 14th-century <pb id=pb592 n=592><note place=margin>[215, 235, 239, 240: 23, 27.]</note>editor been altered to the received chronology, whence arise confusions in his text, as is the case of the Second Life of Thorlac.

<p>The Prologue gives a fair specimen of the Latin ecclesiastic composition of the time, what the Icelanders called a &lsquo;dict.&rsquo; Only §§ 3, 4 give new facts, and are accordingly translated.


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div2 lang=is id=fragments rend="toc-head(Islandic Text) align-with(en.fragments)">

<p>[<hi lang=en-UK>Prologue.</hi>]

<p n=0.1 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a592.1><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Meðr þvi at miskunnar faðer ok Guð allrar hugganar, vórr Herra Jesus <anchor id=a592.2>Christr, hefir leitt vóra forfeðr frá ó-trú ok til almennelegrar ok sannrar <anchor id=a592.3>trúar, ok grund-vallat sína borg ok einkanlega plantað sínn vín-garð, heilaga Cristne, <anchor id=a592.4>um Norðlendinga fiórðung fyrer r&oelig;ksamlega predican heilags lifnaðar ens blezaða <anchor id=a592.5>Ioans Hóla biskops, skipande hann oss foðor ok for-stióra, lífs lære-foðor ok háleitan<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a592.6>árnaðar-mann þeim er á hann kalla með sannre trú ok hreino hiarta ser til fulltings <anchor id=a592.7>ok ténaðar: því hofom ver ætlað með Guðs fulltinge fram at bera með réttlegre <anchor id=a592.8>frá-sogn þat kraftanna liós, sem þesse enn ágæte Guðs geisle, enn heilage Ión biskop, <anchor id=a592.9>hefer fagrlega lýst með ok prýtt, eige at eins sína fóstr-iorð, heldr ok nær-verande <anchor id=a592.10>lond þessa konungs-ríkis, kunnikt gerande efter-komande þióðom þessa góða mannz<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a592.11>verk, siðo ok siðferðe, at heyrande menn þessa frá-sogn hitne því framar í ást ok <anchor id=a592.12>elsko viðr þenna Guðs vin, sem þeir heyra fleire dásamleg tákn ok krafta-verk, er <anchor id=a592.13>Guð hefer gert firer hans volduga verðleika, ok at liós-ker hans krafta-verka, upp <anchor id=a592.14>sett á háfa kersi-stiko, lýse<note place=apparatus id=an592.1><ab type=lineNumRef>14.</ab> lyser, Cd.</note> ollom biartlega Cristnennar sonom, ok brott reke meðr <anchor id=a592.15>sínne birte vór synda myrkr, ok at góðom monnom sé fram settr biartr spegell<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a592.16>fagrlegs efter-dæmes, þeim sem efter vilja líkja dýrðar-fullo sið-ferðe þessa ágæta <anchor id=a592.17>biskops.

<p n=0.2 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a592.18><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Hofom ver þessa frá-sogn,&mdash;seger Gunnlaugr munkr, siðugr maðr ok góðrar <anchor id=a592.19>minningar, er Látínu-(soguna) dictað hefer,&mdash;af oss ellrom monnom ok meir-háttar <anchor id=a592.20>numet, ok eige af einne saman vórre ofdirfð ok hvat-víse þetta veik upp byrjat,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a592.21>heldr at boðe ok á-eggjan verðlegs herra Guðmundar biskops.

<p n=0.3 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a592.22><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Biðjom ver alla þá sem þessa frá-sogn heyra, at firer vórn ólistugan framburð <anchor id=a592.23>ok ó-sniallt orða-til-tæke fyrer-diarfe þeir eige svá háleitt efne sem ver munom fram <anchor id=a592.24>flytja, heldr umbæte meðr ást ok elsku þar sem þeir siá þess með þurfa.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p n=1 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a592.25><ab type=parNum>1.</ab> Þá er enn heilage Ioan hafðe skamma stund veret biskop, lét hann setja scóla<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a592.26>heima þar á staðnom, vestr frá kirkjo-durom, ok let smíða val ok vandlega; &lsquo;hvern <anchor id=a592.27>ver sám með vórum augom&rsquo; (seger Bróðer Gunnlaugr er Látinu-sogona hefir saman <anchor id=a592.28>sett)....

<p n=2 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a592.29><ab type=parNum>2.</ab> Heilagr Ion biskop tók marga menn til kenslo, ok feck til góðan meistara at <anchor id=a592.30>kenna <hi>Grammaticam</hi>, Gísla hinn Gauzka, er fyrr var geteð. En einn Franzeis,<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a592.31>sæmilegan prest-mann, er Rikini hét, capalin sínn, feck hann til at kenna song-list <anchor id=a592.32>ok versa-gerð. Rikini var klerkr góðr, bæðe diktaðe hann vel ok versaðe; ok svá <anchor id=a592.33>gl&oelig;ggr var hann í song-list ok minnigr, at hann kunne útan-bókar allan song á tolf <anchor id=a592.34>mánoðom, bæðe í dag-tíðom ok óttu-songom, með &oelig;ruggre tona setning ok hlióða <anchor id=a592.35>grein; ok þá réðozt margra góðra manna born under hond þessom tveim meistorom,<ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <anchor id=a592.36>sumer at nema Látíno, en aðrer song, eða hvárt-tveggja, kost-gæfande, hverr eftir <anchor id=a592.37>síno næme, at fylla vand-laupa síns hiarta af þeim molom vizko-brauðs, er þeirra <anchor id=a592.38>kenni-feðr bruto þeim til andlegrar fæðo; af hverjom ver sám blóma-berlegan akr <anchor id=a592.39>guðlegrar miskunnar með fogrom ilm víða upp runnenn. Við þessom tók Rikine <anchor id=a592.40>prestr ollom með fagnaðe ok blíðo heilags Iohannis, ok elskaðe sem einka sono,<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a592.41>nærðe ok fóstraðe under sinne for-siá ok gæzlo, varð-veitande þá under sínom <anchor id=a592.42>vængjom, sem fugl sína unga. Her mátte siá um oll hús biskops-stólsens mikla iðn <anchor id=a592.43>ok at-hofn: sumer láso heilagar ritningar, sumer ritoðo, sumer sungo, sumer námo, <anchor id=a592.44>sumer kendo. Enge var ofund þeirra í millum eða sundr-þycke; engi á-gangr eða <anchor id=a592.45>þrætne; hverr vilde annan ser meira háttar: Hlýðne helt þar hverr við annan; ok<ab type=lineNum>45</ab> <anchor id=a592.46>þegar <hi>signum</hi> var til tíða gert, skundoðo aller þegar or sínom smá-kofom til kirk&shy;jonnar, <anchor id=a592.47>sætlegan seim sem þrifet bý-flyge til bý-stocks heilagrar kirkjo með ser <anchor id=a593.1><pb id=pb593 n=593><note place=margin>[240: 27.]</note>berande, hvert þeir hofðo saman boret or lystilegom vín-ciallara heilagra ritninga. <anchor id=a593.2>Meðr tíða upp-hafning hófzt í kirkjonne fagrleg sam-hlióðan songsens í córenom, <anchor id=a593.3>ok hófzt<note place=apparatus id=an593.1><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> Thus; read, hófuzt?</note> sætleg hlióð raddanna. Engenn fór þar með lausung eða marg-mælge; hiner <anchor id=a593.4>ellre menn ok meire háttar vóro með staðfeste ok at-hoga, en unger menn haldner <anchor id=a593.5>ok siðaðer under stiórn hinna ellre manna; ok algerðo svá hvárer-tveggjo fagrlega<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a593.6>sítt embætti; ok skein með þvílíkre birte yfir-lit heilagrar Cristne under þessom <anchor id=a593.7>heilaga biskope.


<p n=3><anchor id=a593.8><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> Aller hiner sæmelegsto kennemenn í Norðlendinga fiórðunge <anchor id=a593.9>vóru nockora hríð til náms at Hólom; þá sem vórr alldr (seger <anchor id=a593.10>bróðer Gunnlaugr) mátte muna, sumer af barndóme, sumer á<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a593.11>fulltíða aldre. Marger af sagðra meistara læresveinom &aolig;ndoðozt <anchor id=a593.12>á vórum d&aolig;gom; en einn af þeim var Ísleifr Hallzson, hvern Ión <anchor id=a593.13>biskop æskte at vera skyllde biskop næst efter hann, ok ténaðar-mann <anchor id=a593.14>síns biskopsdóms, ef hann mædde elle: en hann andaðezt <anchor id=a593.15>fyr en herra biskop.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<p n=4><anchor id=a593.16><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> En at ek nefna nockora sagðra læresveina, þá er ek sá <anchor id=a593.17>mínom augom: var einn af þeim Kl&oeacute;ngr, er síðan var biskop í <anchor id=a593.18>Scál-holte; var hann xij vetra gamall á hende folgenn Ione biskope <anchor id=a593.19>af móðor sínne til fræðe-náms; ok varð hann hinn bezte clerkr, <anchor id=a593.20>ok var lenge síðan sæmelegr kennemaðr í Hóla-kirkjo, hinn meste<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a593.21>upphallz-maðr Cristninnar, predicande fagrlega Guðs orð under <anchor id=a593.22>stiórn ok yfer-boðe tveggja Hóla biskopa, Ketils ok Biarnar; hafðe <anchor id=a593.23>hann marga vaska lære-sveina under ser, ritande bækr margar ok <anchor id=a593.24>merkelegar, þær sem enn tiázt at Hólom ok víða annars-staðar. <anchor id=a593.25>Vilmundr var þar ok lærðr, er fyrstr var ábóte á Þingeyrom: svá<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a593.26>ok Hreinn, er þar var hinn þriðe ábóte. Marger vóro ok þar aðrer <anchor id=a593.27>í scóla, þeir er síðan urðo mektuger kenne-menn: Ísleifr Gríms <anchor id=a593.28>son, frænde biskops; Ión Svarte; Biarne Bergþórs son; Bi&aolig;rn er <anchor id=a594.1><pb id=pb594 n=594><note place=margin>[241: 27.]</note>síðan var enn þriðe byskop at Hólom; ok marger aðrer þeir er langt <anchor id=a594.2>er frá at segja. Þar var ok í fræðe-náme hrein-ferðug jungfrú er <anchor id=a594.3>Ingunn hét. Ongom þessom var hon lægre í s&aolig;gðom bók-listom; <anchor id=a594.4>kennde hon m&aolig;rgom <hi>Grammaticam</hi>, ok frædde hvern er nema <anchor id=a594.5>vilde; urðo því marger val menter under hennar hende. Hon<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a594.6>rædde<note place=apparatus id=an594.1><ab type=lineNumRef>6.</ab> <ab type=textRef>rædde]</ab> emend. (or réd); rétte, Cd.</note> miok Látíno-bækr, svá at hon lét lesa fyrir ser; en hon <anchor id=a594.7>sialf saumaðe, teflde, eða (vann) aðrar hann-yrðer með heilagra <anchor id=a594.8>manna s&aolig;gom, kynnande m&aolig;nnom Guðs dýrð, eige at eins með <anchor id=a594.9>orðom munn-náms, heldr ok með verkom handanna.


<p n=5 rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a594.10><ab type=parNum>5.</ab> Nú flióta slíker hluter fram af einne upp-sprettu; ok siá ávoxtr af einne vín-viðar<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a594.11>hríslu, þat er hinn heilage Iohannes. Kallazt sialfr Dróttinn sætt vín-tré, en hans <anchor id=a594.12>valðer menn vínviðar-kvistir, efter þí sem seger í Guðspiallino: <hi lang=la>Ego sum vitis vera <anchor id=a594.13>et vos palmites.</hi> Nú svá sem hinn heilage Iohannes lærðe ok frædde folk heima á <anchor id=a594.14>staðnom fyrer þílíka menn ok meistara sem talder vóru, svá boðaðe hann ok sialfr <anchor id=a594.15>Guðs eyrinde í kenningom um allar sveiter, þá er hann visiteraðe sítt biskups-dæme.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a594.16>Svá mikit hófzt fræðe fýse ok náms með kostgæfe þessa blezaða biskups, at oðrum <anchor id=a594.17>megum stóðu at klerkar, oðrum-megum leikmenn, hverr at lesa með heilagre græðge <anchor id=a594.18>í sínn minnis-sióð þat er fá mælte af nægð guðlegra auðæfa.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->

<!-- BEGIN OF TRANSLATED TEXT (FRAGMENTS) -->


<div2 id=en.fragments lang=en-UK rend="display(none)">

<pb id=pb593a n=593><p n=3><ab type=parNum>3.</ab> All the priest-clerks in the Northlanders&apos; Quarter were some time at Holar for learning,&mdash;those which our age [<hi lang=la>nostra etas</hi>] says brother Gun-laug could remember, some from childhood up, some in the fulness of their age. Many of the said masters of the scholars died in our days, and one of them was Is-laf Hall&apos;s son, whom bishop John wished to be bishop next after him, and a helper <hi>or</hi> suffragan in his bishopric, if he grew helpless by age; but he died before the lord bishop.

<p n=4><ab type=parNum>4.</ab> But that I may name some of the said scholars whom I saw with mine eyes, one of them was Clong that was afterward bishop in Scal-holt. He was, when twelve winters old, given into the hands of bishop John by his mother for schooling. And he was the best of clerks, and was long after a seemly clerk in Holar church, the greatest upholder of Christendom <hi>or</hi> the Church, fairly preaching God&apos;s Word under the governance and authority of two Holar bishops, Cetil and Beorn. He had many brisk scholars under him, writing many and markworthy books which are still read at Holar and far and wide in other places. Wil-mund was also schooled there, who was the first abbot at Thing-eyre. So also Hran that was the third abbot there.  There were many others there in the school that later became mighty clerks&mdash;Is-laf Grim&apos;s son, a kinsman of the bishop&apos;s, John Swart, Bearne Berg-thor&apos;s <pb id=pb594a n=594>son, Beorn that afterwards was the third bishop of Holar, and many others that it is long to tell of. There was also in the school a pure-living maiden, whose name was Ingun. She was not second to any in the said book-learning; she taught many <hi>Grammatica</hi>, and instructed whomsoever wished to learn, and many became good scholars under her hands. She read many Latin books, having them read before her while she herself was sewing or embroidering or made other handiwork, with the Lives of the Saints, teaching men God&apos;s glory not only with the words of her mouth but also with the work of her hands.

<!-- END OF TRANSLATED TEXT (FRAGMENTS) -->

</div2>


<divGen type="apparatus" rend="columns(3)">



<div1 id=s3.7 n=7>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 7.</ab> BIOGRAPHICA MINORA.</head>


<p>We have here gathered a few scattered anecdotes and incidents relating to the bishops of Iceland.


<list>
    <item>1. The Tale of Bishop Islaf&apos;s Marriage.
    <item>2. The Praise of Gizor by Harold Hardrede.
    <item>3. Bishop Magnus Einarsson and King Gilchrist.
</list>


<p>No. 1 is preserved in Flatey-book, vol. ii. pp. 140&ndash;142 (see Icel. Reader, p. 148).

<p>No. 2 in Harold Hardrede&apos;s Saga, Hulda (see Reader, p. 141).

<p>No. 3. Morkinskinna and Kringla give the better, Hulda and Hrockinskinna a somewhat wordier text, hence preference is to be given to Morkinskinna.

<p>The fourth tale in some respects supplies the lack of a life of bishop Cetil, Are&apos;s friend, and the co-author, with bishop Thorlac the first, of the <hi>Christian Law</hi>, a man who left his mark upon Icelandic life. He <pb id=pb595 n=595>came of a good family, being lineally descended from Godmund the Mighty and Helge the Lean, the Settlers (Sturl. ii. 492). It was his interference and wise and patient bearing that averted a civil war at the memorable All-moot of the year 1121, mentioned in Mantissa, ch. 1. 3&ndash;6 (p. 268), and raised him to the bishopric of the North. The scene in which he tells the tale of his blemish&mdash;he had been blinded in one eye by a stab&mdash;is finely dramatic, recalling the fable Agrippa tells to the Seceders.

<p>For the text of Cetil and Haflide, see the editor&apos;s Sturlunga Saga, vol. i. pp. 29 sqq. (ii. chs. 21 and 28&ndash;30).

<p>Another and shorter version of the story is here appended as given in <hi>Liosvetninga Saga</hi>&mdash;an abstract of the fuller account in Sturlunga. By a scribe&apos;s error, we think, Sturlunga calls Godmund &lsquo;Grim&apos;s son,&rsquo; Liosvetninga &lsquo;the son of Odde, the son of Grim.&rsquo;


<div2 id=s3.7.1>
<head><hi rend=sc>Tales of Bisop Is-laf.</hi></head>

<p>Is-laf, the son of Gizor the White, was a fair man and goodly, not of great height, the most beloved of men. He was at school in Saxland [Saxony] when he was young. It is told once on a time as he was journeying from the south and came through Norway that there was then with king Olaf [Harold&apos;s son] Brand the Free-handed. Him the king held in high esteem, and on a certain holiday he said, &lsquo;Brand, receive this cloak from me.&rsquo; It was a mantle of scarlet, lined with gray fur. Brand and Is-laf met in the town, and it was a glad meeting. Is-laf was then a priest and poor when he came from the south lands. And Brand said, &lsquo;Thou shalt take of me this cloak which the king gave me.&rsquo; He answered, &lsquo;Thou hast not lost thy generous heart yet, and I will gladly take it.&rsquo; And one holiday, as Brand was at the king&apos;s table, the king spake and looked at him: &lsquo;Why hast thou not the cloak, Brand, which I gave thee?&rsquo; He answered, &lsquo;Lord, I have given it to a priest.&rsquo; The king said, &lsquo;I would see that priest, and know what reason there may be in him for thee to part so soon with a king&apos;s gift.&rsquo; Men also began to speak the same way, and say that he had dealt wonderfully with such a man&apos;s gift. And at church Brand said to the king, &lsquo;Lord, there stands the priest in the church, and he has the cloak on.&rsquo; The king looked at him, and said, &lsquo;Now we too will change places, Brand, for I will now give him the cloak myself, and call him now to me, this priest.&rsquo; Brand said that he would do so. Then Is-laf came before the king and greeted him. The king took his greeting well, and said, &lsquo;The cloak that Brand gave thee, priest, I will give thee, and I will pay Brand the worth thereof, for I am so pleased with thee, that I will commend me to thy prayers.&rsquo; He answered, &lsquo;Lord, I thought the gift of Brand very good, but now it is more worshipful still to receive it from thee with this speech.&rsquo;

<p>Afterwards he went to Iceland, and his kinsfolk thought it good that he should strengthen his position by taking a wife. He was a poor man, but he had a good farm at Scal-holt, and a gode-hood. Then he went north to Withe-dale to Asgeir&apos;s-river, where there dwelt a man whose name was Thor-wald, who had a daughter named Dalla [Blind, <hi>Irish</hi>]. They got there early in the day, and the franklin greeted him and asked them to stay with him. But Is-laf said that he wished first to talk with him, &lsquo;for the matter stands so that I am come a-courting hither, and <pb id=pb596 n=596>would ask thee for thy daughter.&rsquo; Said he, &lsquo;There are good reports of thee, and I will answer thee thus: thou shalt come hither to the north and live if thou wilt make this match.&rsquo; He answered, &lsquo;I do not think that that would suit me to leave my estate and my office and household, and we had better depart.&rsquo; Then they turned their horses and rode away. But Dalla was on the top of a hay-rick, and she was the fairest of women. Thor-wald went up to where she was sitting, and she said, &lsquo;Who were those strangers?&rsquo; He told her. &lsquo;What was their errand hither?&rsquo; He said they came a-courting for her. Said she, &lsquo;How didst thou answer?&rsquo; He told her. Said she, &lsquo;That would have not stood in the way of the match if I had the ruling of it.&rsquo; Answered he, &lsquo;Art thou very desirous of this match?&rsquo; Answered she, &lsquo;So it is, for I have this ambition to have the best husband and the best son by him that shall be born in Iceland, and I do not think it would be foolish to go after him.&rsquo; Said he, &lsquo;Thy will has ever had weight with me.&rsquo; So they sent men to ride after them [and bring them back]. Then Thor-wald said that he declared he thought that it ought not to stand in the way of the match, even though Is-laf could not come and live in the north near him. Is-laf was pleased with this decision, and she [Dalla] was given him to wife, and they dwelt afterwards at Scal-holt, and had sons, Gizor and Tait and Thor-wald, and they were all goodly men, though one carried it above all the rest. Gizor was a big man and strong. It was afterwards the counsel of the people of this land to have a bishop over them, and to this office Is-laf was chosen, and he went abroad to be hallowed bishop, and came back and dwelt at Scal-holt, but Dalla would take care of half the estate. It was in those days no easy matter to get men to make offerings. There were no tithes then, but there were tolls [<hi>sic</hi>] laid over all the land.

<p>Is-laf was the noblest of men in his ways. John Ogmund&apos;s son, who was afterwards bishop of Holar, was bred up in his house, and he used to speak these words of praise respecting Is-laf, whenever any one was talking about men who were goodly or skilful or good in any way: &lsquo;So was Is-laf, my foster-father; he was the goodliest of men, the most skilful of men, the best of all men!&rsquo; They would say, &lsquo;Who was speaking of him then, lord?&rsquo; He would answer, &lsquo;He always comes into my head when I hear speak of a good man, for I proved him to be so in every way.&rsquo;

<div2 id=s3.7.2>
<head><hi rend=sc>Of Bishop Gizor.</hi></head>

<p>When Gizor, the son of bishop Is-laf, came to see king Harold [Hardrede], it was said of him that he was a man of mark. Then spake king Harold: &lsquo;It is as ye say, for out of Gizor three men might be made. He might be a wicking captain, and he is well suited to be so. He might also be a king for his nature, and he is well suited to be so. In the third place he might be a bishop, and for this office he is best suited of the three; and this office he shall get, and be held a most noble man therein.&rsquo;

<div2 id=s3.7.3>
<head><hi rend=sc>Bishop Magnus and King Gilchrist.</hi></head>

<p>It is said that in his days there came from Iceland for his consecration as bishop, Magnus Einar&apos;s son, and the king was cordial towards him, and showed him great honour. And when the bishop was ready to go over sea, and his ship bound and ready, the bishop went into the room where the king was drinking, and he greeted him honourably and welcomed him. The king received him well and blithely. The queen was <pb id=pb597 n=597>sitting beside the king. Then the king said, &lsquo;Lord bishop, are ye now bound abroad?&rsquo; He answered, &lsquo;True it is!&rsquo; &lsquo;Thou hast not hit on the right time to come now, bishop, when the table is taken away, for there is nothing now left to give thee as worthy of thee as there ought to be. Now what is there to give the bishop?&rsquo; The treasurer answered, &lsquo;The jewels are now given away, I think.&rsquo; Said the king, &lsquo;There is the drinking-cup here [on the table] left. Take that, bishop; there is money in it, <hi>or</hi> it is worth money.&rsquo; The bishop thanks him for his present. Then the queen said, &lsquo;Farewell and hail, lord bishop!&rsquo; The king said to her, &lsquo;Farewell and hail, lord bishop! Whoever heard a noble lady make such a speech to her bishop and give him nothing?&rsquo; She answered, &lsquo;What is there left <hi>to give him</hi>, lord?&rsquo; The king said, &lsquo;There is the cushion under thee!&rsquo; Then it was given him, and it was covered in pall, and was the most costly ornament. And when the bishop turned to go, the king gave him the cushion from under him <hi>also</hi>, saying, &lsquo;They have long been together.&rsquo; Then the bishop went abroad out to Iceland to his see, and people asked what should be done with the drinking-cup, so that it might do the king most good. The bishop sought counsel with his people; some said that it should be sold and the price given to the poor. Then the bishop said, &lsquo;I will take another counsel: I will make a chalice of it for the cathedral here, and I will consecrate it with such preamble that his soul [the king&apos;s] may get good thereby, and I wish and trust that all the saints of the halidoms here in this holy church may each do the king his separate good whenever mass is sung over it [the chalice].&rsquo; And this chalice hath been ever since at the cathedral at Scal-holt; but of the brocade that covered the cushions which the king and queen gave him were made the four choir-copes now at the cathedral. In this matter ye may mark the great-heartedness or munificence of king Harold. [<hi>The king and bishop met in the summer of</hi> 1135, <hi>but on Dec.</hi> 13, 1136, <hi>Gilchrist was murdered.</hi>]

<p><hi>We subjoin the text from Morkinskinna</hi> (M.), (H. = Hulda and Hrockinskinna, Hkr. = Heimskringla.)


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<p lang=is rend="class(small)"><anchor id=a597.1>Þat er sagt at á hans dogom com af Íslande til byscops-vígslo Magnús Einarsson, <anchor id=a597.2>oc var konungr ágetlega til hans oc veitte hónom mikenn sóma. Oc er byscop <anchor id=a597.3>var í brot búenn oc scipet var al-búet, þá gecc byscop inn í stofona er konungr <anchor id=a597.4>dracc oc quadde hann virðilega oc fagnaðe hónom. Konungr tóc vel við hónom oc <anchor id=a597.5>blíðlega. Dróttning sat hiá konunge. Þá melte konungr: &lsquo;Herra byscop! eroð ér<note place=apparatus id=an597.1><ab type=lineNumRef>5.</ab> ero þer, Cd.</note><ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a597.6>nú búner í brot?&rsquo; Hann svaraðe: &lsquo;Satt er þat.&rsquo;&mdash;&lsquo;Ecke hitter þú nú í tíma til er <anchor id=a597.7>ér kómot nú, byscop, er borðen vóro uppi: nú er ecki til at gefa þer svá virðilict <anchor id=a597.8>sem scylde. Eða hvat er til at gefa byscope?&rsquo; Fé-hirðirenn svaraðe: &lsquo;Upp etlom <anchor id=a597.9>ver nú gefnar g&oelig;rsimar.&rsquo; Konungr melte: &lsquo;Til er borð-keret hérna; þigg þat <anchor id=a597.10>byscop; fé er í. Byscop þaccar hónom sínn sóma.<corr>&rsquo;</corr> Þá melte dróttning: &lsquo;Far heill<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a597.11>oc sell, herra byscop!&rsquo; Konungr melte til hennar: &lsquo;Far heill oc sell, herra byscop! <anchor id=a597.12>hverja heyrðer þú slíct mela gofga kono við byscop sínn oc gefa hónom ecci.&rsquo; Hon <anchor id=a597.13>svaraðe: &lsquo;Hvat er nú til, herra?&rsquo; Konungr melte: &lsquo;Til er hc&prime; gyndit under þer.&rsquo; <anchor id=a597.14>Siðan var þat teket, oc var scoret um pell, oc enn dýrlegste gripr. Oc er byscop <anchor id=a597.15>veic í brot, þá lét konungr taca undan ser hc&prime; gyndet oc melte: &lsquo;Lenge hafa þau<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a597.16>saman veret.&rsquo; Síðan fór byscop í brot oc út til Íslannz til stóls síns; oc var þá <anchor id=a597.17>r&oeacute;tt um hvat af borð-kereno scylde gera þess er konunge gegnde bezt. Byscop <anchor id=a597.18>leitaðe ráðs við menn; melte sumer at selt monde oc gefet tá t&oeacute;com monnom <anchor id=a597.19>verðet. Þá melte byscop: &lsquo;Annat ráð vil-ec taca, g&oelig;ra scal af calec her at staðnom, <anchor id=a597.20>oc vil-ek svá firer mela at hann nióte. Oc vilda-ec at þeir ener helgo menn aller, er<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a597.21>her er af helger dómar<note place=apparatus id=an597.2><ab type=lineNumRef>21.</ab> Hkr.; helgom domom, Cd.</note> í þesse enne helgo kirkjo láte konung hvert sinn nióta, er ifer <anchor id=a597.22>hónom er messa sungen.&rsquo; Oc sá calecr er æ síðan<note place=apparatus id=an597.3><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>æ síðan]</ab> H; er mestr, M.</note> at slaðnom í Scála-holte. En af <anchor id=a598.1><pb id=pb598 n=598>pellonom er ifir vóro dregen h&oelig;genden, oc konungr oc dróttning gáfo hónom, ero nú <anchor id=a598.2>g&oelig;rvar firer-s&oelig;ngs-cápor þar at staðnom. Í þessom hlut má marca stórlete Harallz <anchor id=a598.3>konungs.


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<divGen type=apparatus rend="columns(3)">


<div2 id=s3.7.4>
<head><hi rend=sc>Of Cetil and Haf-lide.</hi></head>

<p>[21.] And now in the summer both sides gathered in numbers to the All-moot all that they could get. And men rode to the Moot the next day before S. John&apos;s-day [June 23], Haf-lide and his sons-in-law, Hall Tait&apos;s son [<hi>Haf-lide&apos;s brother-in-law and the bishop-elect of</hi> 1149], and divers companies with them. They rode early in the day to the Moot, and Haf-lide turned to the booth of Thor-gils and broke it all down to the ground, and then Hall egged Haf-lide that he and his men should ride to meet Thor-gils with the troop they had. He declared moreover that &lsquo;it was a great dishonour and great lawlessness for outlawed men to ride to a hallowed Moot, and let us be mindful of this, that he would not let us carry out the court of execution which ought to be by law, unless there had been a battle.&rsquo;

<p>And then they rode up to the Wallds and made an ambush there; but it went slowly, for there were some that did not wish it, for many men put in their words and would stop such an ambush, saying that both sides would be more easily led to peace, but much evil would befall many men if they did not come to terms. Many men of good will mediated, and there were many delays, and they would not ride further, but alighted. Then priest Cetil Thor-stan&apos;s son came up and asked, &lsquo;Art thou the head of this ambush, Haf-lide?&rsquo; &lsquo;Surely I am,&rsquo; answered Haf-lide. Said Cetil, &lsquo;This plan is not a good one, for it may well be that Thor-gils will take the plan of riding by night, or not by the highway, if he mean to carry the matter by force.&rsquo; And while they were talking bishop Thor-lac came up, and asked Haf-lide to come home to his booth, and they would try and bring about peace. He answers, &lsquo;This matter is now a great deal more imperative, and touches me more nearly, for it cannot be submitted to <hi>or</hi> brought into discussion, that outlawed men should ride to a hallowed Moot, and the laws of the land broken withal. And it will soon be proved such a precedent as many other men will follow if this man be allowed to do so.&rsquo; Then said the bishop, &lsquo;It is true that thou sayest; but is this true which we have heard, that this season thou hast sought help all over the country, from chiefs and from small folk, yea, even poor men and every old cottage wife?&rsquo; &lsquo;Surely it is true,&rsquo; says Haf-lide. The bishop said, &lsquo;It is a lowly deed for such a man as thou art to wish that all men should be on thy side in their hearts and prayers. But yet this must be said, that thou, a wise man, art very greatly mistaken if thou wilt have all the vilest folk on thy side, and against thee that glorious man whose feast it is to-morrow, and who is well-nigh the most noble of all God&apos;s saints, as God Himself witnesseth, and surely his wrath will depend on it, and thou shalt incur it if thou art minded to shed so many men&apos;s blood for this cause. But it is most likely, if thou art willing to forego this on this holiday, and not break the peace, that God and His champion John the Baptist will grant thee the greater share of honour in this suit. And in the second place, thy gain in this case is as nought compared to that which shall be paid thee in the other world for what thou wilt do now for the sake of God and John the Baptist.&rsquo; Then Haf-lide answered, &lsquo;There is truth in thy speaking, but yet I cannot bear that the Moot should be performed in such a lawless way, that outlaws should ride to <pb id=pb599 n=599>the Moot.&rsquo; And they parted, so that Haf-lide refused what the bishop asked. There were then in his array twelve hundred [1440] men. And then the bishop forbade all clerks to go into his company, and ordered all the commonalty to part them....

<p>[28.] When the bishop had called all the clerks to him, he went a second time to see Haf-lide and his men, and spake: &lsquo;Art thou, Haf-lide, determined to pay no heed to any man&apos;s words nor willing to go home?&rsquo; &lsquo;That is uppermost in my mind,&rsquo; says Haf-lide. The bishop said, &lsquo;Then we will go home to the church, and by the power that God gave Peter the Apostle to bind and loose all in earth and in heaven, and which he [Peter] gave to pope Clement, and man to man handed it on, and archbishop Auzor gave it me, and by the force of that power will I forbid thee to stay here, and refuse terms and break the peace. I have got word from Thor-gils that he is willing to make thee a fair offer.&rsquo; And the bishop ended his speech so. &lsquo;And for all these lawful reasons together, if my speech or our prayers may at all prevail with God, I pray that He be so gracious to thy prayer at doomsday as thou art now to me.&rsquo; Then Haf-lide said, &lsquo;Let the end of the case between me and Thor-gils go as it is fated, and let every man put such face on it as he please. But for this argument of thine, I will not do battle for a whole day, if the others do not ride down on us, if thou and these men will promise not to let my case go before it turn in some way to my honour.&rsquo; &lsquo;And thou alone to make the award,&rsquo; says Hall Tait&apos;s son. And men consented thereto. Then Einar Gils&apos; son said, &lsquo;Do thou, Haf-lide, follow the good counsel which the bishop hath set forth to thee, and we will give thee the same backing after the holiday as we would now.&rsquo;

<p>And then Haf-lide and his men went home to their booths. But on the other side Thor-gils and his men rode to his booth in the field, and could there see by the marks left that his booths were broken down. Many men offered him their own awnings, but he would none, and would have nothing else than that his own booth should be put up. And then Sæ-mund the historian set about doing it with certain men, and they began to put up the booth in the evening, and it was finished before prime next morning, working all night.

<p>And now men sought to bring about a peace between Thor-gils and Haf-lide, but Haf-lide would have no other terms than self-doom. And Thor-gils did not deny this, that Haf-lide should give an award of as much money as he asked for his honour, but he would not have him award any outlawry or deprive any one of his gode-hood or estate. And so matters stood fast over the holiday, that Haf-lide would have self-doom without any terms. And the friends of both were in great need of some arbitrament between them. But on the morrow of the holiday [June 25], late in the evening, when most men had laid them down to sleep, Cetil Thor-stan&apos;s son went to Haf-lide&apos;s booth with certain men. And he was welcomed there, and he said to Haf-lide, &lsquo;Great pity will your friends think it if no terms can be agreed upon and the case settled peacefully, howbeit many men think this is past hope now or well-nigh so. And I am not the man to give thee counsel; but I will tell thee a parable. [29.] We all grew up together in Ey-frith, and it was said that we were a promising family. Moreover I got her in marriage who was deemed the best of matches, Groa daughter of bishop Gizor. But it was said that she was not faithful to me, and I was grieved; but the case was taken up and proofs made, and she was cleared. But nevertheless I was aggrieved at the rumour that was set about, and therefore I fixed my hate upon the man [who was rumoured to be my rival]. <pb id=pb600 n=600>And once upon a time when we met upon the highway, I made an onslaught upon him, meaning to overcome him, but he ran under the stroke, and [we wrestled and] I fell beneath him. Then he drew his knife and stabbed me in the eye, so that I lost the sight thereof, and then the man Godmund Grim&apos;s son let me stand up. And this was somewhat unlikely to have happened, for as far as I could tell I had twice his strength, and I believed that there would be no difference in strength between us in other matters. But I wished to get a revenge with a will for this by means of the strength of my kinsfolk, and make the man an outlaw, and we set the case afoot. But yet there came forth men of power on his side to defend his case, and so my case was quashed.&mdash;And now it may well be that certain men come forward in the same way to defend Thor-gils, though thy case be the more righteous.&mdash;And when it was come to this pass they offered me boot in money therefore. But I bethought me of what I had undergone, and how hardly all had happened to me as long as I refused the boot. For I saw then that my sole help was to cast my case upon the mercy of God, for before that time all had gone grievously to my dishonour in the whole case, and unless I set aside the haughtiness and the pride [inherent to us] the Madder-field-men, I saw that it would be a heavy bargain yet for me<note n=1 id=n600.1>The text, resting on a single MS., is here at fault; the bearing is clearly as above. Cetil came of the Madder-weald House.</note>. I also perceived this, that when I was thinking over the condition of myself and my foe, that I could get no such boot from him as would be sufficient restitution of honour for me. So for God&apos;s sake I determined to give up the whole case to him, for I knew that I should then receive in return what would be much more useful to me. [But Godmund became poor and lacked everything<note n=2 id=n600.2>Missing in the text.</note>.] And then I asked him to my house, and he was with me long afterwards. And straightway the ill report was turned away, and with it the opinion held of myself and Godmund, and everything afterwards turned out more lucky and more honourable to me than before. And I hope to God that so it may be to thee, and do thou pick out of my chattels what thou thinkest most useful to thee,&rsquo; says Cetil.

<p>Then Haf-lide thanked him warmly, and said, &lsquo;There hath been a matter under consideration at the Moot that is of great import, whom we North-country-men shall choose for bishop in bishop John&apos;s place, and the Moot past have given the matter over to my choice. But because of this case of ours I have not given my decision so quickly as I should otherwise have done. But now I need look about no longer over the matter, and I will hear of nothing else this summer but that thou be chosen bishop, and it is my belief that it will be the best thing for the people of this land, considering the choice of men they have, if thou become bishop.&rsquo; And their conversation had a great effect, and Haf-lide was henceforward more bent on peace than before, and much meeker of behaviour.

<p>Then Cetil said, &lsquo;I am unfitted for such a charge as this. All men can see how great a blemish there is upon me in men&apos;s eyes. But there are much greater blemishes in my heart in God&apos;s eyes, and I am not suited to the dignity of a bishopric.&rsquo; Nevertheless it came about at the end of their talk that Cetil said, &lsquo;If your case were to be the nearer peace than before thereby, then I would not gainsay this burden, if it be the will of others as it is thine.&rsquo;

<pb id=pb601 n=601><p>After this occurrence a peace was sought afresh between them by men of goodwill, and it came about, though with difficulty, and Hall was more backward over it right through than was Haf-lide. Nevertheless this settlement was made, that Haf-lide should award himself as much money as he liked in return for the wrong he had suffered, but all outlawries, loss of gode-hood and estate were forbidden, according to the terms first offered.


<p><hi>The short Account.</hi>

<p>He [Odde Grim&apos;s son] was the father of Godmund that stabbed out bishop Cetil&apos;s eye. And it came about thus&mdash;those who were no friends of Godmund brought this to Cetil&apos;s ears when he was dwelling at Madder-weald, that he was beguiling his wife Groa, the daughter of bishop Gizor. And they happened to meet on the road: Cetil made an assault upon him, but there was this difference between them, that Godmund got the upper hand and stabbed out his eye. And after this Cetil wished to set a suit on foot against him for this, but then there came certain men forward to quash the suit, and his discredit was increased thereby. But afterwards, when Godmund was moneyless and dependent on others, Cetil asked him to his house, and kept him as long as he lived. And after this everything turned to Cetil&apos;s honour, and in the end he was chosen bishop. Such reward did he get for his goodness.

<p rend="class(small)" lang=is>Hann vas faðer Goðmundar es augat stack ór Katle byskope. En svá barzc at því, at óviner Goðmundar báro þat í eyro Katle þá es hann bió á Moðro-vollom, at hann fiplaðe kono hans [Gró] dóttor Gizorar byskops. Ok fundosc á fornom vege, ok veiter Ketell hónom tilræðe; ok varð þó sá munr, at Goðmundr varð &oelig;fre ok stack ór hónom augat. Ok síðan vilde Ketill framm f&oeacute;ra mál á hendr hónom, en síðan urðo nockorer til at lemja þat niðr, ok ióksc af því ó-virðing. En síðan (es) Goðmundr varð fé-lauss ok þurfte annarra, þá bauð Ketill hónom til sín, ok veitte hónom meðan hann lifðe: ok sn&oelig;resc Katle síðan hverr hlutr til sóma, en at lykðom vas hann til byskops kærenn. Ok gafsc hónom svá sítt góð-ræðe.&mdash;<hi>Liosvetn. Saga</hi> (end).




<div2 id=s3.7.5>
<head><hi rend=sc>The Election of Bishop Godmund of Holar.</hi></head>


<p rend="class(small)">[This translation is made according to the full text as it is found in Cd. Resen. AM. 399, and AM. 657, and printed in Biskopa Sogor (1858), pp. 471 sqq., here marked A. A somewhat abridged text is given in the Sturlunga compilation, printed in Sturl. (1878) i. 116 sqq., here marked <hi>a</hi> in the notes, wherever A can be mended therefrom.]


<p>The appointment of bishops in Iceland forms a curious chapter in Church History which throws light on the general condition of the country. The first two bishops were elected by the Whole Congregation at the All-moot. Thus of Islaf, Hunger-waker says, &lsquo;He was begged to go abroad [for consecration], and chosen to bishop by the whole commonweal of Iceland.&rsquo; And of Gizor it runs, &lsquo;Then the commonweal turned to Gizor, and begged him to go abroad [for consecration].&rsquo; And we find the phrase &lsquo;chosen to bishop at the Moot&rsquo; and the &lsquo;bishop-choosing.&rsquo; Again of bishop John, the first Northern bishop, the creation of his diocese, Holar, came of the prayer of the men of the Northern Quarter to Gizor who granted it: &lsquo;And priest John Ogmund&apos;s son was afterwards chosen to bishop by God and good men, and he went abroad with letters from bishop Gizor,.... and he was hallowed bishop by Auzor archbishop of Lund at Sconey.&rsquo; After this things go on regularly <pb id=pb602 n=602>till bishop Magnus, Paul&apos;s successor in Scalholt, and Godmund of Holar both died, in 1237; upon which the two bishops-elect were vetoed in Norway in 1238.

<p>The Scalholt bishop was regularly chosen by the three Quarters&mdash;East, West, and South&mdash;at the All-moot, and the Holar bishop by the Northlanders at their meeting held for this purpose at Withe-mire. The recommendation of the last bishop, the consent, at least, of the Scalholt bishop in the case of Holar, the influence of the great families in putting forward candidates, the election by &lsquo;the franklins and abbots,&rsquo; the veto of the archbishop,&mdash;all these characteristics of this form of appointment are to be found in the Early Bishops&apos; Lives, and especially in the full account of Godmund&apos;s election.

<p>The bishop&apos;s reign is always counted from his <hi>consecration</hi>, not election. From the election to the consecration one winter at least intervened; for in those days no instance is on record of a man going abroad and coming back the same summer. In the meantime the bishop-elect bore the name of &lsquo;byscops-emne&rsquo;&mdash;a word formed on an Irish pattern. The election of the Scalholt bishop always took place at the All-moot in the second half of June, and he went abroad that same summer (as a rule). The consecration-day was usually timed in the spring, so that the bishop could get back home the same summer to Iceland. Twice, owing to the death of a bishop-elect, the interregnum lasted four and four-and-a-half years respectively (from Sept. 30, 1148, to Midsummer, 1152; and again from Nov. 29, 1211, to Midsummer, 1216). To go abroad was, in that age of navigation, no child&apos;s play. Two bishops-elect, Hall and Tait, died; hence, and no doubt to the advantage of the early Church, the men chosen used to be young or in the prime of life; the youngest is Thorlac I (age 32), Magnus I (age 36); turned 50 (as far as we know) was only John (age 52). Cetil would have been close on 50; Hall, too, must in 1149, his year of election, have been a man bordering on 50, though perhaps not yet on the wrong side of it, for his father died in 1111; and he himself played a part in the famed All-moot of 1121 as franklin of Hawk-dale, and his son Gizor was born not later than 1125 (p. 598). The Hawk-dale men were a long-lived race, yet the journey abroad proved too much for Hall, and cost him his life. Else the age of the bishops-elect verges nearer 40 than 50.

<p>After 1238, throughout the rest of the 13th and the whole of the 14th century, the election rests in the hands of the chapter of Niths-oyce [Nidaros] (part of the general policy of surrendering power to gain peace and end the civil wars), and the characteristics of an election at this period are to be found in the Life of Bishop Lawrence, printed in Biskopa Sogor, vol. i.

<p>After 1413, throughout the 15th century, Iceland was again left to itself, it would seem. We barely know the bishops&apos; names. What influence from outside there was, was English rather than Norwegian, but direct records are wanting. Early in the 16th century the election of John Are&apos;s son, in 1522, was delegated by the chapter to the synod of <pb id=pb603 n=603>priests in Iceland: so bishop Ogmund of Scalholt, in his old age and blindness (1536), got the synod to elect his sister&apos;s son Sigmund Paul&apos;s son as suffragan bishop. Sigmund went abroad for consecration, was taken ill on the consecration-day, and died in Norway nineteen days later (1537). This Sigmund was the grandfather (mother&apos;s father) of John Egilsson the annalist (p. 422). Ogmund then (1539) gets his <hi>protégé</hi>, Gizor, elected by the synod in the same way. He went abroad to Denmark and was consecrated. His subsequent history was not creditable, his unhandsome behaviour to his benefactor being a grievous blot on his memory. Gizor was the first Protestant bishop. As 1238 ushered in Norse rule, so 1539 is another tide-mark in Icelandic history, ushering in the rule of King and Church of Denmark.

<p>The next bishop, Martin the Painter, was chosen by the king, because no Icelandic synod would have chosen a Lutheran. But when once Lutheranism had gotten a hold on the whole country the old usage is recurred to, and we find Odd (1588), his son Gisle (1631), and Bryniulf (1638), bishops of Scalholt, all chosen in synod at the All-moot. The case of Gudbrand of Holar (1570) is too near to the Reformation to be a precedent, but his daughter&apos;s son and successor to the see of Holar, the literary bishop Thorlac Sculeson, was chosen (1628) in synod at Fly-mire; his son and successor Gisle was elected (1656) in the same way at the same place<note n=1 id=n603.1><p>Cp. the following excerpts from Sir John Halldórsson&apos;s Lives of Bishops in MSS.:&mdash;

<p lang=is>Anno 1588.&mdash;Hofuðs-maðrenn bað hann (Guðbrand) koma til Alþinges til góðra ráða og tillaga um biskups kosning.

<p lang=is>Anno 1631.&mdash;Var S<hi rend=sup>r</hi> Gísle af morgum nefndr til biskups kosningar í Skálholte efter föður sínn, og síðan á Alþingi fullkomlega kosinn.

<p lang=is>Anno 1631.&mdash;Kom hann (Bryniolfr) enn í Skálholt fyrir Alþing ... þó Vestfirðingar vilde kiósa hann þá til biskups, samt feck það ecki framgang (<hi lang=en-UK>he was elected seven years later</hi>).

<p lang=is>Anno 1627.&mdash;Þann 20 Augusti á Flugumýrar presta-stefnu snerust vel flester Norðlendingar á eitt ráð ... og kusu til biskups S<hi rend=sup>r</hi> Þorlák Skúlason.

<p lang=is>Anno 1656.&mdash;Á Flugumýre í Skagafirðe var haldenn almennilegr presta-samfundr úr Hóla-stipte um biskups kosningu, og var Gísle Þorláks son þá kosenn til biskups í stað föður síns, sá seinaste biskup af Almenninge kosenn her á lande.</note>.

<p>These were the last bishops in whose election the voice of Church and people was consulted. After Absolute Government was established in Denmark in 1660, the Danish king chose bishops for Iceland as for all other parts of his dominions.

<p>With regard to consecration, as there was no archbishop nor even the full number of bishops in Iceland for regular consecration, the bishops-elect had to go abroad for that ceremony to the next archbishop. Islaf and Gizor went to the metropolitan at Bremen (Gizor to Magdeburg), but John of Holar, and all the bishops of both sees down to Beorn and Clong inclusive, were consecrated by the new metropolitan at Lund. After 1152 there was a metropolitan see raised in Throndham at Niths-oyce [Nidaros]. Accordingly Brand of Holar and S. Thorlac of Scalholt, and all their successors (with the sole exception <pb id=pb604 n=604>of Paul, and for special reasons), down to the end of the 14th century, were consecrated at Nidaros. There is no record further, but in the 15th century there are English names in the list, and we should scarcely be surprised to find that some at least were consecrated at some South-western or Eastern English see&mdash;of some it is even a moot point whether they were consecrated at all. Others passed through England, there being no direct communication.

<p>As an illustration of the close connection with England: in 1520, Ogmund bishop-elect, going abroad to Norway to consecration, is obliged to take an English ship, and touches first at Harwich, whence we have epistles of his. From here he proceeds to Norway. On his way back after consecration and a visit to Denmark, he stayed in Shetland and bishopped children there at Whitsuntide (the last instance of Norse Church influence in these islands). Thence he sailed for Iceland, and after drifting to Greenland, which was then desolate, he reached Iceland in 1522. Gizor (1539), with all following to the present day, was consecrated in Denmark.

<p>Bishops of Icelandic sees were always consecrated on Sunday. We know the day of consecration of at least a score, and of all the early ones, save Magnus Gizor&apos;s son. Of the Norwegian bishops&apos; consecration we have only two dates left, because they happened to be consecrated on the same day as an Icelandic bishop. The accuracy of the chronology, and the way in which it has been handed down with but few scribal mistakes, witness to the historical value of the details of the Bishops&apos; Lives.

<p>We know curiously very little about the religious establishments of Iceland. The list given in the Appendix to the Sturlunga, ii. p. 504, gives most of the known facts. There is no Life left of any abbot or monk. The only glimpse of regular life comes from the Bishops&apos; Lives, especially the account of Thorlac&apos;s house of Canons Regular, and the story of Lawrence&apos;s earlier life. It is rather remarkable, too, that there were no establishments of friars in Iceland, though John the Norwegian (the story-teller, to whom we owe the story of archbishop Absalon, Reader, p. 234), Lawrence&apos;s fellow-bishop, was a Dominican.

<p>Bishop Arne (d. 1298) is the last bishop of Scalholt of whom we have a biography. Before him there are biographies of the first seven bishops, the &lsquo;prince-bishops&rsquo; of his see, Scalholt. Of the bishops of Holar we have biographies of the first, John; the fifth, Godmund; and, after a long interval, of Lawrence (the last biography of all, d. 1331)&mdash;three most distinguished men of very different characters.

<list>
<item><hi rend=sc>Bremen</hi> (and Magdeburg):&mdash;

    <list>
    <item>Islaf (Scalholt): <hi>elected</hi> 1054 (?). <hi>Consecrated</hi> Whit-Sunday, 26 May, 1056; back to Iceland the same summer. <hi>Died</hi> 5 July, 1080.

    <item>Gizor (Sc.): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, June, 1081; goes abroad the same summer. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday, 4 Sept., 1082; back to Iceland the summer of 1083<note n=1 id=n604.1>There is a double account, the same or the next summer; we give the preference to the former.</note>. <hi>Died</hi> 28 May, 1118.
    </list>

<pb id=pb605 n=605><item><hi rend=sc>Lund</hi>:&mdash;

    <list>
    <item>S. John (Holar): <hi>elected</hi> 1105. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday (Rogate), 29 April, 1106; back in the summer. <hi>Died</hi> 23 April, 1121.

    <item>Thorlac I (Sc.): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, 1117; goes abroad the same summer. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday (Misericord.), 28 April, 1118; goes back the same summer. <hi>Died</hi> 1 Febr., 1133.

    <item>Cetil (Hol.): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, June, 1121; goes abroad the same summer. <hi>Consecrated</hi> 1st Sunday in Lent, 12 Febr., 1122; back the following summer. <hi>Died</hi> 7 July, 1145.

    <item>Magnus I (Sc.): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, 1133; puts to sea, driven back by counter winds; starts for good in the summer of 1134. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday, 28 Oct., 1134; back in the summer of 1135. <hi>Died</hi> 30 Sept., 1148.

    <item>Biorn (Hol.): <hi>elected</hi> 1146, and goes abroad. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday (Misericord.), 4 May, 1147; comes back the same summer. <hi>Died</hi> 20 Oct., 1162.

    <item>&ast;Hall (Sc.): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, 1149; went abroad the same summer; <hi>died</hi> unconsecrated in Utrecht, 1150.

    <item>Clong (Sc.): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, 1151; went abroad the same summer. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday (Quasi modo Geniti), 6 April, 1152; back to Iceland the same summer. <hi>Died</hi> 28 Febr., 1176.
    </list>

<item><hi rend=sc>Nidaros</hi>:&mdash;

    <list>
    <item>Brand I (Hol.): <hi>elected</hi> in the summer, 1163; went abroad the same summer. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday, 8 Sept., 1163; came back to Iceland in the summer of 1164. <hi>Died</hi> 6 Aug., 1201.

    <item>S. Thorlac II (Sc.): <hi>elected</hi> as assistant-bishop at the Moot, 1174; went abroad 1177. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday, 2 July, 1178; came back to Iceland the same summer. <hi>Died</hi> 23 Dec, 1193.

    <item>Paul (Sc.): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, 1194; went abroad the same summer. <hi>Consecrated</hi> (at Lund, Denmark) Sunday (Jubilate), 23 April, 1195; came back the same summer. <hi>Died</hi> 29 Nov., 1211.

    <item>Godmund (Hol.): <hi>elected</hi> at an autumn Moot at Wallds, 1 Sept., 1201; goes abroad 14 July, 1202. <hi>Consecrated</hi> Sunday (Quasi modo Geniti), 13 April, 1203. <hi>Died</hi> 16 April, 1237.

    <item>&ast;Tait (Sc): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, 1212; went abroad, 1213; <hi>died</hi> in Norway, 1214.

    <item>Magnus II (Sc): <hi>elected</hi> at the Moot, 1215; went abroad the same summer. <hi>Consecrated</hi> (day unknown), 1216. <hi>Died</hi> 14 Aug., 1237.
    </list>
</list>

<p>The bishops of both dioceses having died in the same year, two bishops-elect were now sent abroad&mdash;

<list>
    <item>Magnus (Sc): and

    <item>Kygri-Beorn (Hol.)<note n=1 id=n605.1>Þá fóro útan á Eyrom þeir Magnusson Goðmundar son gríss&mdash;hann var kosenn til byskops í Scálaholte&mdash;ok Kygri-Beorn es Norðlendingar hofðu k&oelig;ret til byskops.&mdash;Sturl. i. 426, cp. also Bisk. S. ii. 185, 186.</note>.
</list>

<p>Both started for Norway, 1237&ndash;38&mdash;a year of evil memory; but now the times were changed, both elections were cancelled in Norway, and two Norwegians were consecrated (elected by the chapter in Nidaros it seems), Botholf to Holar and Sigward for Scalholt. Both bishops-elect <pb id=pb606 n=606>(both men stricken in years) died soon after, Beorn in 1238 in Norway, Magnus was drowned Sept. 20, 1240. They were the last popular elected men in Iceland. The year 1238 sounded the death-knell of the old Icelandic commonwealth. The Flatey-book entering <hi>sub anno</hi> gives pithy utterance to this: &lsquo;The All-moot deserted, which was thought portentous,&rsquo; i.e. there was <hi>no</hi> Allthing held&mdash;an event unheard of since the establishment of the commonwealth. The quarter-of-a-century that remained was a time of anarchy.

<p>Now Godmund the priest and his companions go forth from Swine-fell to East-frith, and come to Staf-fell at Bartholomew-mass [Aug. 24]. There he got tidings at matins&mdash;the death of bishop Brand. And he was as dazed by these tidings as if he had been stunned by a stone. Then he had a dumb mass<note n=1 id=n606.1>um tolo, A; corrupted, we think, from &lsquo;án (ón) tolo;&rsquo; om. <hi>a</hi>.</note> sung at once for his soul, and the day after all the offices for the soul and a dirge, with all care and love.

<p>Afterwards they went forth until they came east into Fleets-dale-hundred to Wal-theow&apos;s-stead to John Sigmund&apos;s son at Giles-mass [Sept. 1]. It was the church-day there, and they were welcomed. And when John brought Godmund the priest to church in the evening, Godmund the priest asked him what tidings there were, but John says, &lsquo;Both great and good. The men of the Hundred of Shaw-frith are to hold a meeting to-morrow to choose a bishop, and thou shalt be chosen, for God willeth it.&rsquo; And from that time forward there was such great terror in his breast that he could by no means comfortably enjoy sleep or meat for the awe and dread of these words. There was then in Fleets-dale-hundred Rand-weg, a woman that had been in a trance, and she came to see Godmund the priest, and told him of her vision with great terror and awe. In the evening before Cross-mass [Sept. 13], Godmund the priest came to the place that is called Lithe in Fleets-dale-hundred. There Godmund the priest dreamed that night that he thought he came into the church at Wallds in Swarfad-dale, and he thought the altar fell into his arms, and he thought he was vested in the fairest vestments. And that proved true, for in the evening they go north over the heath to Weapon-frith, and came in the evening to Cross-wick. And when they were come to table, there came messengers of Colban, Tume&apos;s son [the ruling chief in the north], Einar Fork [at their head], and they walked in and up to Godmund the priest and greeted him well, and he took their greeting well. Then he asked them for tidings. Says Einar, &lsquo;We tell thee good tidings; thou art chosen bishop by Colban and all the men of the hundred and the abbots, and I bring thee now their letter and message, that thou shouldst come hence to the north as quickly as may be.&rsquo; But he was so dumbfounded at these tidings that he could not speak for a long while. And when he began to speak he prayed God to keep him, and let that fall out which should be best for all. The day after Godmund the priest goes forth to Temple to Tait Odd&apos;s son. There was then on a visit with him Hall-dor the priest. Then Godmund the priest takes counsel with Hall-dor the priest whether there was any hope that he would release him from this charge and take it up himself, but he refused, saying that he was old and not fit for it withal, and he said he could see that it would be no use for him to refuse, and he said that it was God&apos;s will and men <pb id=pb607 n=607>&lsquo;that thou be bishop,&rsquo; says Hall-dor, &lsquo;but I will convoy thee with my prayers and in all that I can to help thee.&rsquo;

<p>Godmund the priest and his companions go forth thence northward to Ax-frith over Madder-dale-heath. There came upon them a storm and blinding snow, and their company was driven asunder until Godmund the priest got his reckoning, and found that they were not on the right path, and he and his three deacons&mdash;Sturla Bard&apos;s son, and Lam-car Thor-gils&apos; son<note n=1 id=n607.1>Whom we suppose to be the writer of this narrative, later abbot of Hitardale.</note>, and Thor-lac Thor-stan&apos;s son&mdash;were the first to get to a house. Then long after came Snorre Bard&apos;s son, and Grim Sholto&apos;s son, and Grim Gale, and last came John Ale&apos;s [Onela&apos;s] son, and their baggage-man. Now they went on till they came to Greniad-stead, where there dwelt Eyjolf Hall&apos;s son the priest. Then Godmund the priest called upon Eyjolf Hall&apos;s son the priest, to tell him whether he would consent to be bishop. But priest Eyjolf told him this, that he knew for certain that there was no use talking of that [for he said that the men of Shaw-frith and Ey-frith would have none but Godmund for bishop]<note n=2 id=n607.2>[&nbsp;&nbsp;] add. <hi>a</hi>.</note>.

<p>Now they go from the north and come to Halse at Michaelmas [Sept. 29] to Ogmund Thor-ward&apos;s son [Godmund&apos;s first cousin]. Ogmund asks whether it were true that he refused to be bishop, and he said that it was true. &lsquo;What means this?&rsquo; said Ogmund; and Godmund the priest says, &lsquo;Because it seems to me that there is great jeopardy therein to have to deal with many men, both obstinate, and full of envy, and mighty; and wouldst thou, my kinsman, be obedient to us if we were to rebuke thy way of life?&rsquo; But Ogmund says, &lsquo;Whose troubles shouldst thou rather take upon thee than mine? and though I were disobedient to thee, yet I would be more disobedient to any one else, and no one else will dare to rebuke me, and it will not avail thee to refuse; and it will go with thee as with bishop Ambrose<note n=3 id=n607.3>Godmund and Ogmund used to play together and many other children with them. But their games and play always ended the same way, however they began. Godmund got the mitre and staff and chalice, church and altar, and was the bishop in their play, and Ogmund got axe and shield and weapon, and was the warrior. And this seemed to men to be a great omen of what was to come, when there happened to each of them what was fated.&mdash;The <hi>Saga</hi> in an earlier part.</note>, thy foster-father; the play of childhood foretold for thee as for him, that thou should be a bishop. Now it was no use for him to refuse, and so it will be with thee; and we will have no bishop but thee.&rsquo;

<p>Now Godmund the priest goes forth until he comes hence to Withe-mire at the Winter-nights [c. Oct. 15]. All men were glad to see him&mdash;Colban and Thor-ward [Godmund&apos;s uncle], and Gyrith [Godmund&apos;s cousin and Colban&apos;s wife], and all the others. The Saturday after Thor-ward Thor-gar&apos;s son fell to speech with Godmund the priest, they two alone. He asked him whether it were true that he had made up his mind to this, to refuse to be bishop, and not to listen to his judgment or that of other wise men, friends and kinsmen and relations. And he said that it was true. [Says Thor-ward], &lsquo;I think I have a right to judge for thee and to be thy guardian, and I will have my way.&rsquo; Then answers Godmund the priest, &lsquo;Why should that be, that I should not have my way in my own matter?&rsquo; Thor-ward answers, &lsquo;Know thou this, kinsman, that I have always been a chief over our kindred, and my father before me. And thy father and also all my kinsmen were therefore wont to listen to <pb id=pb608 n=608>my advice, and I give thee this counsel, for thou shalt be the chief after me.&rsquo; Then says Godmund the priest, &lsquo;Thou didst not offer me my father&apos;s heritage, and little honour hast thou sought for me hitherto, save to beat me to my book; and so now also meseems thou wilt put me into jeopardy, and not into honour, and I will not consent to this.&rsquo; Says Thor-ward, &lsquo;What! Have I heard such a thing indeed? Thou putting away thine own honour and ours; but it shall not avail thee, for thou shalt be bishop as I have dreamed thou would.&rsquo; &lsquo;What hast thou dreamed?&rsquo; saith Godmund the priest, and Thor-ward says, &lsquo;I dreamed this, that I went into a house so great and high, that I had never seen one so great and high, and there were big doors there too, that were of no less measurement. But when my head came to the door it caught my shoulders, so that I could not get further. Now I have read this dream thus: that thy honour<note n=1 id=n608.1>vegr, A and <hi>a</hi> (?).</note> must be so big that all Christendom <hi>or</hi> the Church could not compare a greater, and this house must be liken the Church. And dreams are in common between us. Then I dreamed another dream. Methought I came north to Thrond-ham, and into the hall of king Olaf. Methought he was sitting in his high-seat, and the hall was all decked. Methought he stood up to meet me, and stretched out his arms and greeted me. &ldquo;A hale and blessed welcome to thee, Thor-ward, thou shalt be blessed over all the lands of the North.&rdquo; Now I know thou hast part in this dream, and thou shalt go abroad, and become bishop, and thou shalt be hallowed in Olaf&apos;s church at Thrond-ham. Now it shall not avail thee to speak against this, for it shall come about whether thou will or not.&rsquo; Then they broke off the talk, and Thor-ward told Colban all their talk on both sides.

<p>After that Colban goes to meet Godmund the priest, and he tells him that they had held a meeting at Wallds at Giles-mass. &lsquo;And there were at the meeting the abbots of Thing-eyre and of Thwart-water. There were Gizor Hall&apos;s son, and Godmund Deer, and many men of the Hundred, and there were put up for election thou and Magnus Gizor&apos;s son. And Gizor pleaded the case of his son Magnus, and said that there was more support for him, and that he was more tried in the management of an estate than thou. But I made as if I liked whichever should be chosen; and then answered Healm As-beorn&apos;s son and Hafer [yeomen both] and many others, that they did not care so much for men out of the Quarter as to have a man chosen out of the other Quarters, and they all were of one mind on this, so that there was no one to speak against it, and so they all agreed, and now thou art firmly chosen both by God and man. And we trust that thou wilt do both God&apos;s will and ours.&rsquo; Then Godmund the priest answers, &lsquo;I will first hear whether the other men of the Hundred are of the same mind as thee, for methinks much lies upon it, and a great charge it is, and I am therefore slow to undertake it.&rsquo;

<p>Then a meeting was called on the Lord&apos;s-day at Withe-mire, and thither came the men of the Hundred and took the matter into consideration anew, and it came to the same conclusion that they were all again agreed. These men sent to the church after Godmund the priest, and he came in, and Colban told him that they prayed him for his consent and agreement to undertake this charge that they asked him to take and be bishop. But when Godmund the priest saw how the matter stood with Colban, that he would have nothing but that, and that he thought it would be better for himself, then Godmund the priest said, <pb id=pb609 n=609>&lsquo;I will rather trust myself with God&apos;s grace to consent to this charge, than take the risk on me of no one being chosen.&rsquo; Then Colban answered, &lsquo;Thou speakest most blessedly,&rsquo; says he; and they all thanked him anew, and now for the second time the election was confirmed, and men went home that night.

<p>But that evening there was a high-seat prepared for him, and Colban himself bore in the meat before him, and spread a cloth on the table before him. But as there was little time for it, the cloth was rent, and Colban spoke about it. &lsquo;Thou canst see now that we treat thee rather with familiarity than according to thy deserts, since there is such a shabby cloth under thy plate.&rsquo; But he answered smiling, &lsquo;No matter for the cloth, but it will go so with my bishopric; it shall be rent like this cloth.&rsquo; But Colban held his peace and answered not.

<p>In the morning after they made ready to go to Holar with the bishop-elect, Colban and Thor-ward and his own clerks. Colban gave him a full-grown ox in the morning before they went forth, saying that this should be the first of gifts between them. They went forth late that day, and came out to Holar the even before the mass of the Maids of Cologne [Oct. 21], and there was made a procession to meet him. And when they were come there Colban took upon him the whole governance of the stewardship and possessions of the homestead, and asked no leave of the bishop-elect. Cygre-Beorn was at Holar before; and before they came to Holar, Lamcar the deacon of the bishop-elect did all Colban&apos;s writing-work as long as he was at home, but as soon as they came to Holar, Lamcar was kept out of all letter-writing and Cygre-Beorn was taken for letter-writing in his place. And Colban began at once to take Beorn into his friendship more than any other man, and Beorn at once began to take a hatred for the bishop-elect out of envy, because he thought he was held in too little account by him. And this was a sign of what was to come of Beorn, for his envy grew greater and more manifold, and he was filled with the devilish seed of the enemy of all mankind without ceasing, and it grew greater the longer it dwelt in him.

<p>Now it is told so, that as the winter went over Colban alone had governance of all there, and the bishop-elect was so overborne that he could not bring it about that his brother&apos;s sons should be there, but he made them a homestead at Calf-stead out of the money that had been given him in the summer; but Colban made so free as to establish himself at the bishop&apos;s stead with six men beside. Moreover the bishop-elect wished that the poor should be given a meal thrice a day, but Colban drove them into the guest-house and had them given one meal. But when Yule was passed away, Thorarin the Despenser came on the eve of the Epiphany to talk with the bishop-elect, and spake to him, &lsquo;Thou art not curious as to the state of the household which we have in hand.&rsquo; The bishop-elect answers, &lsquo;Methinks it is the worst thing to meddle without having might&rsquo; &lsquo;Nevertheless I wish to tell thee,&rsquo; says Thor-arin, &lsquo;how matters stand. I fixed so much food to last for the Yule-feast this winter, as hath long been used to be found, and every week what hath been cooked hath run short at the end of Yule, but now it hath lasted a week longer, and yet there hath never been such a multitude here at Yule as now.&rsquo; Then answered the bishop-elect, &lsquo;It must be, my son, that Mary loveth hospitality more than Colban doth.&rsquo; Colban sat by and held his peace, and answered not. Then the despenser went away, and the neatherd came up at once in the same hour and told him the same story about the fodder for the cattle which he <pb id=pb610 n=610>had in his hands, that it had never lasted as long before as it had now. And the bishop-elect answered the same, &lsquo;Who knoweth, but Mary loveth hospitality better than Colban doth?&rsquo;

<p>But after Yule the bishop-elect sent Thord Wermund&apos;s son east to Eyre to summon Raven to meet him at Mid-frith at Sexagesima, for he wished to ask him to go abroad with him. But when it came to the time that was fixed, the bishop-elect made ready to depart from home. And when he was come to his horse <hi>or</hi> cart Colban went up to him and spake to him: &lsquo;Now I wish that we should lay down our differences that have been between us this winter, for there hath been no cause for it, and let us make no account of it either of us.&rsquo; The bishop-elect answered, &lsquo;I do not think that I have been at fault, and it would be well if thou hadst done no ill, but thou hast taken the risk if thou have done otherwise.&rsquo; Colban answers, &lsquo;We may both have had something to do in it, as is mostly the case, but it is likely that I have had most to do with it, and I wish to ask thy forgiveness, and I wish to forgive thee, if thou have in any way taken too much on thyself.&rsquo; The bishop-elect answered, &lsquo;Good words are good, and every man is blind in his own case, but I protest that I have not taken too much upon me this winter, because I have never had the choice given me.&rsquo;

<p>Then he went west into the country and took guest-quarters at Thing-eyre. There was a good nun there. She was an anchoress, and a woman of good understanding. Her name was Wolfrun. She was the mother of priest Simon the Tall. She kept so straitly to her solitude that she would not have her son come to her, or see him when he came to see her. She told the bishop-elect that Mary had shown her in a vision that God and She wished him to be bishop. &lsquo;And thou shalt not refuse, if thou wilt follow God&apos;s will: as thou wilt surely do, for it is so laid down for thee.&rsquo; This account he thought markworthy, and he put faith in it.

<p>Now the bishop-elect went forth thence till he came to Stead-bank in Mid-frith at the day named. That same evening Raven Swainbeorn&apos;s son came thither from the west out of the Friths as was appointed. Then the bishop-elect spake a long and markworthy discourse on the Lord&apos;s-day, and declared that if any man were come there, or were aware of any man that would be willing to take up the charge that was put upon him, or would challenge him therefore, he said that he would gladly give it up if he might do so by common consent. But no man that was come there dared to be the challenger. And at that meeting the going abroad of Raven Swainbeorn&apos;s son with the bishop-elect was settled. From this meeting Raven Swainbeorn&apos;s son went home westward to Eyre, and the bishop-elect north to Holar with his company.

<p>That winter the bishop-elect had sent men with a letter east to Swine-fell to Sigurd Orm&apos;s son and Thurid, which said thus: &lsquo;God&apos;s greeting and his sendeth Godmund, that is now called bishop-elect, to Sigurd and Thurid. God hath shown great tokens [of His bounty] upon us, so that we are able to fulfil our promise, as we are in duty bound toward you, to give you an establishment. Now I am in need of your help since I have taken upon me a greater charge than I am able to bear. Now I offer you both to be stewards to me and look after my property. And do ye come as soon as ye may, for that will be to the gain of the bishopstead and of me and of us all. <hi>Valete.</hi>&rsquo;

<p>Now when the word of the bishop-elect came to Sigurd he made ready and went forth from the east after Yule, and met the bishop-elect as he was going home north, and Sigurd went north to Holar before <pb id=pb611 n=611>him. But when the bishop-elect came home it was taken into consideration what choice Sigurd should have, for he said that he would not take it up unless the stewardship and the property of the see were handselled to him, but the bishop-elect was slow to handsel him the place. These wise men, Colban Tume&apos;s son, Hafr Brand&apos;s son, and many others, prayed the bishop-elect rather to handsel Sigurd the place than to reject such a man as Sigurd, and they all thought that he could not do better for the stewardship than to give it into the hands of Sigurd and Thurid, and the end of their counsel was that he handselled Sigurd the whole stewardship for him. Then Sigurd went home east with a letter of the bishop-elect to bishop Paul in Scal-holt, saying thus: &lsquo;God&apos;s greeting and his sendeth Godmund that is now called bishop-elect. We have consented to take up a greater burden than we are able to bear, and have not got your leave, as is meet. Now we wish to ask you to look into this matter on God&apos;s behalf, as ye are well able to do, and say what course ye choose. If ye will choose another man to this office and charge which we have unworthily taken up, then I will gladly give it up and depart, inasmuch as I am aware of some men that they think they have gone too far in the matter. But I have appointed Sigurd Orm&apos;s son as my steward, because men misdoubt my stewardship. Now do ye quickly choose one way or another, as God shall teach you, and send me a letter as soon as may be, whether ye choose me or not.&rsquo;

<p>But when Sigurd came to Scalholt and gave bishop Paul the letter of the bishop-elect, then bishop Paul sent a letter east to Odd to Sæmund. &lsquo;God&apos;s greeting and his sendeth bishop Paul to Sæmund his brother.&mdash;A letter of Godmund the bishop-elect is come to me that I should choose another man to bishop if I will, and he says he is ready to give up the election. He hath also appointed Sigurd Orm&apos;s son steward for him, because men rather dreaded that his own management of the estate would not be prudent. I think also I can perceive this in his letter, that he must mean to go abroad in the summer, if he be elected, because he prayeth me to do one thing or the other quickly, elect him or no. Now I will that thou tell me what I shall say to him.&rsquo;

<p>Sæmund sent a letter in answer to bishop Paul which speaketh so: &lsquo;To bishop Paul God&apos;s greeting and his own sendeth Sæmund his brother.&mdash;Know thou, brother, that Godmund bishop-elect hath been no great friend in our dealings with Sigurd, but yet he is much praised by many men, and it is likely since the choice hath fallen on him that it must be God&apos;s will. I also hear that he must be very well fit therefore in many ways, both by reason of his charity and good conversation and purity of life, which is of most account. But if there be anything else therein, do thou take no burden off the North-land-men, but let them answer for their choice themselves. This is my counsel, that thou choose him rather than not; for it is not certain who will be better pleasing to God than he, and it is best to risk it. It is uncertain that he shall be found whom none can find fault with. The North-land-men were self-willed in their choice, and now let them bear the risk whatever it be.&rsquo;

<p>Now when the letter came to Scalholt the bishop sent word to Thor-wald Gizor&apos;s son, and to Magnus his brother, and to Sigurd, and they appointed a meeting, and the bishop declared to them that the election was put to him, that he made up his mind to choose Godmund to bishop and was counselled before. They all bind themselves together with a covenant, and bishop Paul and Sigurd, and those with him, send Ingimund Grim&apos;s son with a letter to the bishop-elect. The letter <pb id=pb612 n=612>spake thus: &lsquo;Bishop Paul sendeth God&apos;s greeting and his to Godmund bishop-elect.&mdash;God hath chosen thee to bishop by God&apos;s laws and men&apos;s, as may most fully be done in our land. Now as God and good men have laid this charge upon thee, there is need that we should see thee as soon as may be, for we perceive this in thy letter, that thou art minded to go abroad in the summer, if it go so as thou art minded. Now I will come and meet thee wherever thou wilt, but I will give thee thanks and gratitude if thou wilt come to see me at home, though I do not oblige thee to this, for I have many needful errands to the archbishop, wherefore I would have thee come and see me before thou go abroad.&rsquo;

<p>Now the winter passes away, and after Whit-days [c. June 6, 1202] the bishop-elect went south to Scalholt to meet bishop Paul. Godmund the bishop-elect took with him the letters that he had sent to the archbishop. Then he went home to Holar. Then Sigurd also came from the east with Thurid to Holar for good, and he put it to the bishop that their property should be invested there, and they set the amount at ten hundred hundreds that was in all kinds of property, both money and kind, and he was obliged to consent thereto. Afterwards he was made ready to go abroad by means of the tithe. Godmund bishop-elect was one winter old of the fifth teen [age 41] when he went abroad to be hallowed bishop....

<p>But when the bishop-elect came abroad, Raven Swainbeorn&apos;s son came abroad from the west, and he was then ready to go with him as they had appointed. They settled to take with them fifteen Icelandish men. These were Raven Swainbeorn&apos;s son, Thomas Thorarin&apos;s son, and Iwar John&apos;s son, Grim the Monk the son of Healte, Erlend the priest, Berg Gundstan&apos;s son, and Eyjolf Snorre&apos;s son, and Thorstan Cambe&apos;s son, Godmund Thormod&apos;s son the priest, Brand Dalc&apos;s son, Peter Bard&apos;s son, and Snorre his brother, Thord Wermund&apos;s son, and Hosculd Are&apos;s son, Colswain Beam&apos;s son. They put out the Lord&apos;s-day [July 14, 1202] before the <foreign lang=la>Divisio Apostolorum</foreign>. The bishop-elect had sent from the ship north up the frith Colswain to get water-casks, and he came from the north down to the frith when the ship was sailing out, and became a strand-gaper. Just at the moment there came men rowing in their shirts. It was Narve of Brink, and they were come with their catch of fish from the east out of Flatey. Now Colswain tells them his trouble, and calls on them for help. &lsquo;Thou art in a bad plight,&rsquo; says Narve, &lsquo;but since it is both a need of thine and the bishop-elect, I will certainly do thy will.&rsquo; They cast their catch out of the boat at once and took in Colswain and his baggage, and rowed under sail down the frith. Then the wind began to blow, and the ship was getting away. When they saw that the two vessels were falling farther apart, Narve said, &lsquo;How far are we to follow after the merchantman before thou hold us free from reproach in the pursuit as far as depends upon us?&rsquo; Colswain answers, &lsquo;Out in the chops of the frith, where the sea meets it.&rsquo; &lsquo;All right,&rsquo; says Narve, &lsquo;and so it shall be.&rsquo; But when the merchantman came out as far as Hrisey, then the bishop-elect spoke: &lsquo;Now let fall the sail; I will not sail away from my man that is ashore. Moreover I will have mass to-day on the island.&rsquo; The Eastmen [Norwegians] spoke against it, and it was against the will of them all to lose so fair a wind. But he said that it would be bad luck, &lsquo;and God will let a still greater delay fall on our journey.&rsquo; But when they saw that he misliked it, the sail was let fall and the anchor let go, and the bishop-elect went ashore to sing mass. Now Narve and his men need not row any longer. Colswain got on board, and in the morning <pb id=pb613 n=613>when the wind was fair, and they wished to bring their anchor home, it was fast, and one after another went to the job, and tried everything that came into their mind. Then the bishop-elect was told of it, and he went up to it, and said, &lsquo;My Lord, do thou loose the anchor!&rsquo; and took hold of the rope. With that the anchor came loose at once, and they betook them to their sail, and sailed to Grimsey. They lay there a week. Then there came up a fair wind, and they sailed north of Gnup. Then came a head-wind, and drove them quite west of Shaw-frith. Then they ceased drifting, and they ratched again a second time north of Lang-ness. Then came a land-wind and set them adrift, and drove them west into the deep. Then one night a woman on board had a dream. She thought she saw a big and a glorious man come aboard their ship to the bishop&apos;s berth, and walk down the ship until he came there where the bishop-elect was resting, and blessed him. She thought it was bishop John, and afterwards she awoke.

<p>The morning after the bishop-elect said, &lsquo;It is my counsel to set sail and sail round the land west about, for the north-east winds keep blowing, and we cannot go round the land north about.&rsquo; This counsel was taken to haul up the sail and sail round the land west about, and so by West-frith, and south of Snae-fells-ness, and east by Eyia-fell. Then the north-east winds kept blowing and drove them south right out to sea until they were ware of the Sudreys, and could make out that they were come to the islands that are called Hir-tir [S. Kilda]. Then they bore south on the main by Ireland. Then they sailed south of Ireland and had stormy weather, and could hear the roar of the surf on all sides about them. Then the bishop-elect gave counsel that all men aboard should go to shrift, and the clerks should all shave their tonsures, and men should make vows. It was done as he bade. They promised to give an ell out of every sack, and send a man to Rome and give half a mark of wax every man to churches. Then straightway the storm fell, and they got a fair wind to Norway, and the bishop-elect found king Hacon in Bergen, and he received him very well. The bishop-elect went north to Niths-oyce, and archbishop Eiric hallowed him to bishop.


<p><hi>The Log according to Raven&apos;s Saga.</hi>

<p>[Another log-book of the voyage is given in Raven&apos;s Saga, which we subjoin. For the text, see Sturl. ii. p. 290. A comment on the two logs is given in a letter of the late Captain Thomas, of the Royal Survey, in Icelandic Sagas, Rolls&apos; Series, vol. i. p. xxxvii.]

<milestone unit=tb>

<p>On this voyage there were with Raven Thomas Thorarin&apos;s son, and second Thord Wermund&apos;s son, and third Eyjolf Snorre&apos;s son. The bishop-elect was glad to see Raven and his mates. And when the ship was fitted out and the wind was fair they put to sea. They hardly got a fair wind through the summer, and were long at sea. They were driven south into the deep, so that they got [to sea] past off Ireland, and later they were borne towards Scotland, and they lay some nights off a place called Stair. Down from Scotland they got such a mighty wind from the south that the men that had been there said that they had never come into such a high sea as that they sailed in down from Wharf in Scotland. Grim Healte&apos;s son spoke this verse:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The foaming wave wades along beneath us off Wharf [C. Wrath].
    <l>It blows keen out of the south, the strong billows grow great. This is no slight toil.
    <l>The keel springs, and the spray comes driven into men&apos;s berths.
    <l>Now the sea-mountains are swollen. She keeps on south most proudly.
</lg>

<pb id=pb614 n=614><p>They were come into a hard gale that drifted them. And in the night the men that kept watch and were awake heard a great crashing and an awful thundering sound. They espied so big a wave that they thought their death was certain if it came on the side of their ship. The shipmen, Bot-olf and the others, set sail, saying that that was the only chance of life if they could put her about first with the sail hoisted. Raven said the breaker was too near for them to bring it off. He bade them go to the bishop-elect and tell him what a plight they were in. The bishop-elect stood up at once and took the halidom and went out to the bulwark and blessed [the sea]. Then the ship turned head on to the breaker. And when they were in the break of the wave it broke everywhere as far as they could see save at their bows; nevertheless the water came in on both quarters and carried away the sun-board [upper bulwarks], and drove all the hammocks [skin bags] back into the bilge. The shipmen had all one saying in their mouth. &lsquo;It went better than was to be looked for,&rsquo; they said. But the bishop-elect thanked God and said that it went as it was like to. Then they set sail, and had such a great gale that they sailed with one reef. And at nightfall one day they saw land, and were got so near [shore] that there were breakers on either quarter. They knew that they were come to the Sudreys, and there was no man that knew how to pilot them, and most men thought that the ship would be wrecked and those on board perish.

<p>But when they were come into so great peril they got no counsel of the shipmen. Then the bishop-elect spake and bade Raven take the helm, saying that his good luck would be of great help to them and his good information. Raven answers, &lsquo;The master&apos;s word is law,&rsquo; and bade the bishop-elect give him his blessing, and said he would take the thing in hand trusting in God and him. The shipmen called him a dare-devil to take such a charge in his hands, though he owned nothing of the ship if it should not turn out well. But Raven said that he would not take this charge on him if any other man would pilot them. &lsquo;But ye must see that it cannot go on as it is, and there is something to be done in every danger.&rsquo; But none of them offered to take the charge. Then Raven took the piloting with the consent of all the shipmen. Godmund the poet notes this:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>They got into great peril, I ween, the sailors broke down in piloting,
    <l>The worn-out crew had to take to the sail:
    <l>It was black to see the breakers falling on every side about the quarters,
    <l>Where the tarred sea-horse cleared the waves through the skerry-wall.
</lg>

<p>Now when they were come into so great peril Raven said that they should sail for the islands, and he said he would pilot them the best course he could. And so they did; they sailed through the night, and he piloted them with great skill and luck. Thomas Thorarin&apos;s son said that three times he could see nothing but land on their bows, and they could not tell whether there were any sound <hi>or</hi> passage or no. Godmund the poet notes this:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The poet on the sea-horse took to piloting through the night to the morning watch.
    <l>Raven proved, I ween, of great profit to men:
    <l>He got both saved, ship and men.
    <l>The sail swelled, and the cold wave plashed.
</lg>

<p>It happened that they got through the islands just as they could see the brow of day. Then Eyjolf the Old quoth this half verse:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>East from the heritage of the Irish furious gales chased the sea-horse,
    <l>Until the Lord of the Heavens gave a votive wind to the sailors.
</lg>

<pb id=pb615 n=615><p>Then Grim began to recite:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>The clever Sudrey-lady is looking on our sailing, as the stars are sparkling:
    <l>The thin seams are distressed now.
</lg>

<p>And next they came into a good haven off an island that is called Sandey, and there the chapman raised a harbour-mark.

<p>So says Grim:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Botolf has brought his swift ship to Sandey the brent;
    <l>The wave was falling on the seams just now.
    <l>He himself raised and did a useful work, a harbour-mark,
    <l>The brisk comrade of lords, on behalf of the strong ship.
</lg>

<p>They lay off Sandey in an anchor-berth some nights. King Olaf was then ruling over the Sudreys. There came a bailiff of the king to them and collected the land-ounce from them, according as the laws of the Sudreys run, and they reckoned that they ought to pay twenty hundreds of wadmal, because there were twenty Icelandish men on board. They would not pay because they understood that they would have to pay as much again in Norway. After that Raven and the bishop-elect went ashore and many with them to church, because the bishop-elect wished to hold the services <hi>or</hi> hours. The king was come there, and he bade the bishop to table [with him]. But when the bishop-elect wished to go away, the king said that the bishop-elect must do him right [i.e. pay his dues] or he said he would keep him there. But the bishop-elect refused flatly. Raven said that it was to be looked for, but offered to give it as a gift to the king <hi>or</hi> to do the king honour. But he said that he would have what he ought. But when the shipmen were aware of this, that the bishop-elect and Raven were kept, then Botolf bade men take their weapons, saying he would not desert such brave fellows without knowing what was become of them. And when they were ready they leaped into the boat and rowed to land, and went ashore in a ranked company; but the Sudrey-men were sitting under a hillock, and the bishop-elect and Raven with them. Then men made peace between them, and this was the settlement in the end, that the bishop-elect and his men should pay six hundreds of wadmal. After that they brought the bishop-elect aboard again, and sailed with a fair wind and had a good passage, and made Norway in their ship south of Throndham at a place called Eid. There they learnt of the death of king Swerre. They lay there through the night. Thence they sailed north to Throndham, and brought their ship to Nith&apos;s-oyce. Then Grim quoth this verse:&mdash;

<lg>
    <l>Here we come to the harbour-mark on board the vessel,
    <l>With Godmund the bishop-elect.
    <l>We learnt one night before off Eid of the fall of lord Swerre,
    <l>The king&apos;s men will not be in a merry mood.
</lg>

<p>They were in Norway through the winter, and there were many meetings held. And the bishop-elect excused himself much, and declared that he was but little fit for this office. There are many tales to be told [that happened] ere Godmund was hallowed, but by the means of Raven and other good men he was hallowed bishop by archbishop Eiric on the mass-day of the holy virgin Euphemia [April 13, 1203]. Hacon Swerre&apos;s son was then king over Norway.



<pb id=pb616 n=616>
<div1 id=s3.8 n=8>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 8.</ab> LAW ECCLESIASTIC.</head>

<p>There is a Title of Icelandic <hi rend=sc>Church Law</hi> <hi>or</hi> <hi rend=sc>Law Christian</hi> among the other Titles in the Corpus Iuris known as Grágás, which is there described as a body of rules or constitutions made &lsquo;by bishops Cetil and Thorlac by the counsel of archbishop Auzor and of Sæmund [the historian], and many other clerks.&rsquo; It was taken as law by the All-moot c. 1125 (see Introduction to Libellus), and it was treated precisely like other Titles as part of the Statute Law of the land.

<p>That part of this Title which touches old custom or Constitutional Law, or peculiar early Church usage, or is otherwise of individual interest, is translated here from Codex Regius, the oldest extant MS. [Finsen, K, §§ 1&ndash;19.]

<p>Another Title, the <hi rend=sc>Tithe Law</hi>, passed by the exertions of Gizor and the chief men of Iceland c. 1096, is of value for comparison with the English Law on the subject. [Finsen, K, §§ 255&ndash;260.]

<p>Bishop Gizor was really the S. Olave of Iceland, the organizer of the Establishment and Diocesan Church; he found the Church dependent on private charity, and left it fixed on legal ground, whether for better or worse we have not to judge here. Like the Law Christian, it is printed from Codex Regius.

<p>A few extracts from the Law of <hi rend=sc>Rape-parting</hi> are also given. [Finsen, K, §§ 234&ndash;35.] It seems to be of later date than the other two.

<p>The text of Codex Regius used is, as before, Mr. Counsellor Finsen&apos;s edition.

<p><hi rend=sc>The Christian or Church Law.</hi>

<p>This is the beginning of our laws, that all men shall be Christian here in this country, and believe in one God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of Baptism.</hi> Every child shall go to baptism when it is born, as soon as may be, however shapen it may be. If the child&apos;s next-of-kin be by there, he shall take the child to the baptism or the man whom he asketh so to do....

<p>The franklin is bound to feed the men that bear a child to baptism, three men of full age and the child the fourth, and their horses or beasts of draught if they have them with them. If he have less money than so as to be bound to pay Moot-fare-pay, then he is bound to give them house-room and sell them meat and hay, at the rate the neighbours fixed. He shall be paid within fourteen nights the worth of the meat and hay. If the franklin deny them harbour or this provision that hath now been spoken of, he shall pay an outlaw-fine of three marks, and he hath the pursual that is denied harbour....

<p>If sickness be on the child, then he shall be baptized with the first water that can be found....

<pb id=pb617 n=617><p>If a child die prime-signed and have not been baptized, then he shall be buried outside the churchyard where the hallowed earth and unhallowed earth meet, and no corpse-service be sung thereover....

<p>Every man that hath understanding thereto, man or woman, is bound to learn the <hi lang=la>Pater Noster</hi> and <hi lang=la>Credo in Dominum</hi>. If he will not learn them and hath his wits he shall pay a life-ring-garth [fine], and the bishop shall settle as to the pursual who shall have it.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Burial.</hi> Every corpse which is entitled to the church shall be borne to the church as soon as men are ready so to do....

<p>To that church shall the body be borne at which the bishop allows burial.

<p>The franklin is bound to feed the man that bears the corpse to the church and five men with him, and their horses or beasts of draught, if they have them with them. If he deny them this, then he shall pay an outlaw-fine of three marks, and he hath the pursual that is denied harbour....

<p>A corpse shall not be borne to church bare or bloody....

<p>A corpse shall not be buried before it is cold. If a man bury a body before it is cold, then he oweth a convict-fine therefore of three marks, and he hath the pursual that will.

<p>If men hurry the burial so that a quest declare that the breath was in the man&apos;s breast when he was buried, then it is murder.

<p>Graves shall all be an even price, whether they be near the church or farther in the churchyard; twelve ells shall be the price of a man&apos;s grave, save it be a toothless child, which shall be paid half as dear. The priest shall have six ells for the corpse-service. He shall pay the grave-price and the corpse-service-price that beareth the body to the church. He shall pay it there at the church-stead, where the body is buried, on the fifth day of the week, when there are four weeks yet of the summer [c. May 10], there in the home-garth before the men&apos;s door....

<p>If a body be found on the fells where the water-shed divides the desert, then he shall bear the corpse to the church that liveth next to the waters in that hundred, nearest to where the waters spring, if he have two house-carles beside himself [in his household]....

<p>There be four bodies that shall not be buried in church. This is one body, if a man die unbaptized. The second is an outlaw&apos;s body, that is not to be maintained or helped on his way; he shall not be buried at the church, save the bishop of the Quarter give leave; but if the bishop give leave, then he shall be borne to church. This is the third body that shall not be buried at church, if a man do such a crime upon himself that he die thereof, if he have meant so to do, save he repent afterwards and go to shrift with the priest, and then he shall be buried at the church.... This is the fourth body that shall not be buried at the church, if the bishop have forbidden a man to be buried at the church, that body shall not have a grave at the church, but shall be buried outside men&apos;s home-garth, an arrow-shot beyond the bound, where neither is acre nor eng [mead], and wherefrom no streams fall toward the bowster [homestead], and no corpse-service shall be sung over it.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of Churches.</hi> Every church shall stand in the same place that it was consecrated in, if it be not for earth-slips, or water-floods or fire, or great storms, or desolation of the hundred [district] either for dales or outlying coasts; in such case it is lawful to move the church if such things come to pass. It is lawful to move the church if the bishop give leave.

<pb id=pb618 n=618><p>If the church be taken up a month before winter [Sept. 10] or is wrecked so that it be useless, then the bodies and bones shall be carried thence before the next Winter Nights [mid-October]. The bodies and bones shall be taken to the church at which the bishop giveth leave for them to be buried....

<p>If a church be burnt down or wrecked so that another must be built, the church shall be built where the bishop will and as big as he will, and the church called [dedicated] as he will. The landowner is bound to have the church built on his land where whosoever [it was] first built it. He shall so begin the building that it be built within the next twelve months from the time that the church was so wrecked, that the hours [services] might not be said. If he neglect this [<hi>apodosis</hi> missing].

<p>The landowner ought to endow the church, so that the bishop be willing to consecrate the church on that account. Then the bishop shall go to consecrate that church. The franklin that hath the land there is bound to hold a church-day that same day every twelve months, his household and guests that are there the night before, and all they that pay tithe thither when the bishop wisheth them to keep their church-day. Every one shall keep the church-day where the bishop wisheth. Church-day shall be kept as holy as Pask-day [Easter-day], and ... with other mass-days.

<p>Every man shall pay half his lawful tithe to the church which the bishop pointeth out, and the bishop shall divide the hundred [district] to this intent, that wherever a man live he shall pay his tithe to the church, whosoever it be that dwelleth on the land. He that shall pay tithe shall pay it in the home-garth before the men&apos;s door, on the church estate, the fifth day of the week [Thursday], when four weeks of summer are gone [c. May 10]; he shall pay this fee either in wadmal or peltry of ware <hi>or</hi> trade or in gold or burnt silver....

<p>When a man endow a church, whether it be with land or cattle or loose money, or whether it be in tithes of the bowsters [homesteads], which the men of the hundred have to pay there, the man that hath the patronage of the church must let make all this agreement on a scroll, [setting down] what he hath given there in fee, or other men of the district, to this church. This charter it is right to carry to the Moot and give notice of at the Laws-hill or in the Laws-court, or at the Spring-moot to which he that endoweth the church belongeth. He shall have the scroll read, and give notice of the charter at home at the church once every twelve months when men come in greatest numbers to the service <hi>or</hi> hours....

<p>The franklin that dwelleth on the church estate ought to carry fire to the church and ring the bells, or the man that he calleth on so to do.

<p>It is also right for the priest to carry fire to the church, and light the candles and ring the bells, and for those so to do whom he calleth upon.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of Priests.</hi> It is right for a man to have a priestling taught for his church; he shall make an agreement with the boy himself if he be sixteen winters old, but if he be younger, then he shall make it with his lawful guardian. This agreement ought to hold all the terms they make between them. But if they make no other agreement, but a man take a priestling for a church according to the words of the law, he shall give him teaching and fostering, and let him be so chastised that it be no dishonour to the boy or his kin, and treat him as if he were his <pb id=pb619 n=619>own child. But if the boy will not learn, and loathes his book, then he shall set him to other tasks, and chastise him so that he do him no ill nor disfigurement thereby, and treat him with every other kind of sternness. But if he will turn to his book again, then he shall keep him to it, until he have taken orders and is a priest. He that giveth him teaching is also bound to get mass-clothes and books, which in the bishop&apos;s judgment shall suffice for the full twelve months&apos; services.

<p>The priest shall go to the church to which he is consecrated, and sing there every holiday, if there be no impediment, mass and matins and evensong, and at Long-fast [Lent] and Yule-fast [Advent], and all the Ember-days he shall publish or give notice at the Laws-hill or at the Laws-court of his terms of engagement which were made with the priest.

<p>He hath the right to make a protest at the Laws-hill if he will as to the way he is kept.

<p>If the priest fly the church that he was taught to, or go away so that he will not do the hours, as hath been said, then he that receiveth him becometh an outlaw, or that accepteth his services or communeth with him. It is the same penalty to commune with him as with an outlaw, when there hath been protest made from the Laws-hill: and it is a Fifth-court matter <hi>or</hi> suit, and the suit shall be given notice of at the Laws-hill, and he shall be brought home like other bad servants of men.

<p>A priest may free himself from a church by teaching another in his stead whom the bishop shall think fully his equal; the bishop hath jurisdiction therein....

<p>And if a church priest die at the place where he was taught, and hath left property behind him, the church shall have it, and the man that was his patron 300 six-ounce ells. If he had more property, then his kinsmen shall have it.

<p><hi>Of the Bishops.</hi> We shall have two bishops here in the land. One of the bishops shall be at the seat [of the see] in Scalholt and the other at Holar in Sholto-dale.

<p>And he shall hold the circuit of the Northlanders&apos; Quarter that is in Sholto-dale once every twelve months.

<p>And the bishop that is in Scalholt he shall hold the circuit of his three Quarters one every summer&mdash;the East-frith-men&apos;s Quarter, and the Wrang-river-men&apos;s Quarter, and the West-frith-men&apos;s Quarter.

<p>The bishop is bound to go round the Quarters and to visit every lawful Rape, so that men be able to see him, and to consecrate churches and chantries and oratories, and bishop [confirm] children, and give men shrift. When a bishop shall consecrate a church he ought to receive twelve ounces, and this money the bishop giveth to the church which he consecrated. When he shall consecrate a chantry or an oratory he shall receive six ounces for each that he shall consecrate....

<p>The priest ought to take to himself a lawful domicile at the Flitting-days [end of May]. And it is right that they keep it afterwards till the lawful Leet [c. 20 Aug.] when it is Lord&apos;s-day, when, the Saturday before, there were eight weeks yet alive [left] of the summer....

<p>A priest must not sell his services....

<p>A priest ought not to sing more masses than two.

<p>A priest hath not to sing a night-mass save the first Yule-night. But if he do otherwise he is finable, nor shall any mass be bought of him.

<p>Priests ought to be obedient to the bishop and show him their books and mass-clothes. The priest whom the bishop willeth shall sing the mass, and not he whom he forbids to do so.

<pb id=pb620 n=620><p>A priest must not go with gay dress which the bishop forbiddeth, and he must cut off his moustaches and beard and shave his crown once every month, and obey the bishop in all things. But if he will not keep what the bishop ordereth he shall pay a convict-fine of three marks, and the bishop hath the pursual, and he shall sue the suit at the priests-court at the All-moot and name twelve priests to the court, and set forth his suit before them, and the bishop shall himself bear verdict in the case and two priests with him, and he shall sue this suit without oath....

<p>If bishops or priests come out thither to this land that are not learned in the Latin tongue, whether they be Armenian or Greek, it is right for men to listen to their service if they will, but their services are not to be for fee, and no service shall be taken from them.

<p>If a man let the bishop that is not learned in Latin consecrate a church or bishop children, then he shall pay a convict-fine of three marks to the bishop that was here before, and he shall take the consecration-fee, and he shall consecrate the church and bishop the children as if it were not done before, though they have chaunted over them, since they are not learned in the Latin tongue.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of Heathendom.</hi> Men shall believe in one God and His saints, and sacrifice to no heathen wights. A man doth sacrifice to heathen wights if he sign his cattle to other than God or His saints. If a man sacrifice to heathen wights, then he shall pay a life-ring-garth [fine].

<p>If a man work charms or spells or enchantment&mdash;he worketh enchantment if he singeth or speaketh or maketh to be sung for himself or his cattle&mdash;then he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine, and he shall be summoned at home, and the suit pursued with a quest of twelve.

<p>If a man worketh witchcraft he becometh an outlaw. That is witchcraft if a man work by his words or enchantment sickness or death to beast or man. This shall be pursued with a quest of twelve.

<p>Men shall not use stones or charm it, to bind it on man or man&apos;s beasts. If a man believe in a stone for his healing or the healing of his cattle, he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine.

<p>No man shall keep unborn cattle. If a man hath an unborn beast, and letteth it go unmarked, so that he put more trust in it than he doth in his other cattle, or worketh with back-spells of any kind, he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine.

<p>If a man go bear-sark&apos;s way [run amuck], he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine, and all the men that stood by, if they do not hinder him. If they stop him they are not any of them at all [bound to pay a penalty], but if it come oftener he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of Holidays.</hi> We shall keep the Lord&apos;s-day every seventh [day], so that there shall be no work done save that which I will now reckon....

<p>We shall keep Saturday every seventh, from the nones which is next the Lord&apos;s-day. There shall then be no work done from the afternoon [c. 4.30] save that which I will now reckon....

<p>We ought to keep Yule holy here in this land, that is thirteen days. The first day of Yule and the eighth and the thirteenth shall be kept as Pask <hi>or</hi> Easter-day, and the second day of Yule and the third and fourth shall be kept as the Lord&apos;s-day. On all days save these it shall be right to clean the cattle&apos;s litter, and the third and fourth day of Yule as a man will....

<p>Pask <hi>or</hi> Easter we ought to keep holy....

<pb id=pb621 n=621><p>We ought to keep the mass-days that are lawfully received&mdash;


<table rend="columns(2) font-size(smaller)">
<column>
<column rend="align(right)">
<column>

<row><cell>Jan.  <cell>21. <cell>Agnes-mass.
<row><cell>      <cell>25. <cell>Paul.
<row><cell>Feb.  <cell> 1. <cell>Brigid.
<row><cell>      <cell> 2. <cell>Mary [Candle-mass].
<row><cell>      <cell>22. <cell>Peter [Cathedra Petri].
<row><cell>      <cell>25. <cell>Matthias.
<row><cell>Mar.  <cell>12. <cell>Gregory.
<row><cell>      <cell>21. <cell>Benedict.
<row><cell>      <cell>25. <cell>Mary [Annuntiatio].
<row><cell>April <cell>23. <cell>John [of Holar].
<row><cell>      <cell>25. <cell>1st Gangday.
<row><cell>May   <cell> 1. <cell>Philip and James.
<row><cell>      <cell> 3. <cell>Cross-mass [inventio crucis].
<row><cell>June  <cell> 9. <cell>Columba.
<row><cell>      <cell>24. <cell>John [Baptist].
<row><cell>      <cell>29. <cell>Peter [and Paul] Decollatio.
<row><cell>July  <cell> 8. <cell>Selia-men&apos;s-mass.
<row><cell>      <cell>25. <cell>James [the greater].
<row><cell>      <cell>20. <cell>Olafs-mass [fyrre]. Passio.
<row><cell>Aug.  <cell>10. <cell>Lawrence. (Lafranz-m.)
<row><cell>      <cell>15. <cell>Mary [Ascensio] [fyrre]<note n=1 id=n621.1>Mariu-messa fyrre <hi>and</hi> síðare mean in the Sagas the 15th Aug. and 8th Sept. respectively, but in the Charters (term for lighting the churches) the 2 Feb. and 25 March.</note>.
<row><cell>      <cell>24. <cell>Bartholomew.
<row><cell>Sept. <cell> 8. <cell>Mary [Nativitas] [síðare]<ref target=n643.1 type=noteref>[#]</ref>.
<row><cell>      <cell>14. <cell>Cross [elevatio crucis].
<row><cell>      <cell>21. <cell>Matthew.
<row><cell>      <cell>29. <cell>Michael.
<row><cell>Oct.  <cell>28. <cell>Simon and Jude.
<row><cell>Nov.  <cell> 1. <cell>All Hallows.
<row><cell>      <cell>11. <cell>Martin.
<row><cell>      <cell>22. <cell>Cecilia.
<row><cell>      <cell>23. <cell>Clement.
<row><cell>      <cell>30. <cell>Andrew.
<row><cell>Dec.  <cell> 7. <cell>Nicholas.
<row><cell>      <cell> 8. <cell>Ambrose.
<row><cell>      <cell>13. <cell>Magnus [Decoll.][&amp; Lucy]
<row><cell>      <cell>21. <cell>Thomas [Apostle].
<row><cell>      <cell>23. <cell>Thorlac<note n=2 id=n621.2>Enacted at the All-moot 1199, on June 29th, the anniversary of his election at the Moot 1174.</note>.
</table>

<p>There be fifteen days in the twelve months that men shall not hunt more beasts than I shall reckon up. Men may take white bears and go from home therefor, and he hath the bear that first gives him a death-wound (whoever own the land), save it be a thrall or a bond-debtor, then the bond-creditor or owner shall have it.

<p>Walrus men may hunt, and he hath half that hunteth it, and he half that owneth the land.

<p>Stranded whales men may move and moor, and flinch them if they cannot moor them. If there be land-gang to fish men may take them. There is land-gang if men may hew them with the hewing-irons or take them with the hands [from the shore]. There shall be no net taken along nor angle.

<p>Men may hunt fowl moulting if they can be taken with the hands. He shall give the fifth part thereof as of other Lord&apos;s-day hunting.


<p><hi>The fifteen high-days.</hi>

<p>

<table rend="columns(2) font-size(small)">
<row><cell>1st day of Yule.
<row><cell>8th  <ditto>day of Yule.</ditto>
<row><cell>13th <ditto>day of Yule.</ditto>
<row><cell>1st  <ditto>day</ditto> Pask.
<row><cell>Ascension-day.
<row><cell>Whit-Sunday.
<row><cell>1st Mary-mass.
<row><cell>2nd <ditto>Mary-mass.</ditto>
<row><cell>3rd Mary-mass.
<row><cell>4th <ditto>Mary-mass.</ditto>
<row><cell>All-Hallows-mass.
<row><cell>John Baptist.
<row><cell>Peter and Paul in the summer.
<row><cell>The Church-day.
<row><cell>Thorlac&apos;s-mass.
</table>

<p>The Long-fast [Lent] we ought to keep, that is seven weeks from the Lord&apos;s-day when we enter upon the fast, as it is declared at Moot and Leet. When a man entereth upon the fast he shall eat flesh before midnight, and then he shall not eat meat for seven weeks until the sun runs upon the hill on Pask <hi>or</hi> Easter-day....

<p>Men must not eat horse or dog or fox or cat, or any claw-beast or <pb id=pb622 n=622>any carrion-fowl. If a man eat those beasts that are forbidden he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine....

<p>So set they, bishop  Cetil and bishop Thorlac, by the counsel of archbishop Auzor and of Sæmund and many other clerks, the Church-Law Section that hath now been particularly set forth and said over.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of Novells.</hi> This novell was made when Magnus Gizor&apos;s son was become bishop, and it is now a lawful duty to fast these eight nights that before were not law-bound.

<p>A novell shall not be read longer than three summers, and shall be said over at the Laws-hill the first summer at hallowed Spring-moots or Leets.

<p>All novells are loosened [dissolved] if they be not said over every three summers.


<p><hi rend=sc>Note on Chronology of Icelandic Saga Writers.</hi>

<p>The following days were used in reckoning (especially in Sturlunga and Lives of Bishops) beside those given in the text of the Law:&mdash;


<table rend="columns(2) font-size(small)">
<row><cell>Jan.  <cell> 7. <cell>Cnut, Duke.  Passio.
<row><cell>      <cell>13. <cell>Geisla-dagr.
<row><cell>      <cell>17. <cell>Antonius-messa.
<row><cell>      <cell>20. <cell>Bræðra-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>22. <cell>Vincentius-m.
<row><cell>Feb.  <cell> 3. <cell>Blasius-m.
<row><cell>Mar.  <cell> 3. <cell>John (of Holar) [translatio].
<row><cell>      <cell>16. <cell>Gvendar-d.(Godmund of Holar) [post classic].
<row><cell>      <cell>19. <cell>Mariu-m. [Boð.].
<row><cell>April <cell>13. <cell>Euphemia.
<row><cell>      <cell>14. <cell>Tiburtius-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>16. <cell>Magnus-m. (Ork.)  Passio<note n=1 id=n622.1>Enacted at the All-moot 1326.</note>.
<row><cell>      <cell>28. <cell>Vitalis-m.
<row><cell>May   <cell>15. <cell>Hallwards-m. Passio.
<row><cell>      <cell>27. <cell>Dýre-dagr<note n=2 id=n622.2>Dýre-d. enacted at the All-moot 1326.</note>.
<row><cell>June  <cell>15. <cell>Vítus-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>17. <cell>Botolfs-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>21. <cell>Leofredus-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>25. <cell>Cnut, Duke [transl.].
<row><cell>July  <cell> 2<note n=3 id=n622.3>After 1271 the All-moot was moved, and met June 29, so that July 2 fell within the first Moot-week.</note>. <cell>Thing-Mariu-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>10. <cell>Cnut, King. Passio.
<row><cell>      <cell>15. <cell>Sviptun&apos;s-m. [Swithun bp.]<note n=4 id=n622.4>But in Bp. Arne&apos;s Saga, Bisk. Sogor, i. p. 715, S. Swithun means 2nd July, as may be seen from the context. Bp. Arne having been present at the king&apos;s coronation on S. Swithun&apos;s-day, started for Iceland on S. Olave&apos;s-day, 3rd Aug.</note>, and also <hi lang=la>Divisio Apostolorum</hi>.
<row><cell>July  <cell>20. <cell>Thorlac&apos;s-m. [translatio]<note n=5 id=n622.5>Enacted at the All-moot 1237.</note>.
<row><cell>Aug.  <cell> 1. <cell>Banda-d. <hi>Vincula</hi>.
<row><cell>      <cell> 3. <cell>Olafs-m. (síðare).
<row><cell>      <cell> 6. <cell>Sixt.-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>28. <cell>Augustinus-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>29. <cell>Hofud-d. <hi>Decapitatio</hi>.
<row><cell>Sept. <cell> 1. <cell>Ægidius-m. (S. Giles).
<row><cell>      <cell> 5. <cell>Bertínus-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>11. <cell>Protus and Iacint-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>21. <cell>Matheus-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>22. <cell>Mauritius.
<row><cell>      <cell>28. <cell>Vencelaus-m.
<row><cell>Oct.  <cell> 1. <cell>Remigius-m.
<row><cell>      <cell> 4. <cell>Franciscus.
<row><cell>      <cell> 9. <cell>Dionysius-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>13. <cell>Festum Reliquiarum.
<row><cell>      <cell>18. <cell>Lucas-m.
<row><cell>      <cell>21. <cell>Colnismeyja-m.
<row><cell>Nov.  <cell>21. <cell>Mariu-m. [presentatio].
<row><cell>      <cell>25. <cell>Catrinar-m.
<row><cell>Dec.  <cell> 4. <cell>Barbaru-m.
<row><cell>      <cell> 8. <cell>Mariu-m. [conceptio].
<row><cell>      <cell>16. <cell>Jóns-m. [transl.].
<row><cell>      <cell>28. <cell>Barna-d.
</table>


<p><hi rend=sc>Of Tithe-paying or Yielding.</hi>

<p>That is spoken in the laws here that men shall give tithe of all their possessions here in this land, a lawful tithe. That is a lawful tithe that a man shall give a six-ell ounce in the two seasons [twelve months] if he have one hundred six-ell ounces.

<p>The man that hath ten six-ell ounces besides his clothes of every-day <pb id=pb623 n=623>wear without debt, shall give an ell of wadmal, or the wool of so many fleeces that six thereof make one packet, or a lamb pelt.

<p>And he that hath twenty ounces, he shall give two ells.

<p>And he that hath forty, he shall give three ells.

<p>And he that hath sixty, he shall give four ells.

<p>He that hath eighty, he shall give five ells.

<p>He that hath one hundred, he shall give six ells.

<p>This property is not to be reckoned for tithe that hath been already given to God, that hath been laid out in church endowments, or in bridges, or in soul-ships or ferries, whether that fee be in land or loose moneys.

<p>Priests need not tithe the property they have in books and mass-clothes, or anything that they have for God&apos;s service. They shall pay tithe of their other property....

<p>If a man hath a godehood he need not reckon it for tithe, for it is a power and not money.

<p>All franklins shall pay tithe that owe neat-fare-pay, or on their property that is debtless....

<p>Women shall pay tithe just as men.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of the Tithe.</hi> Men shall have meetings at the harvest-tide in every Rape not before there be only four weeks of summer left to divide the tithe. The division of the tithe shall take place the first Lord&apos;s-day in winter.

<p>Five men that are held to be the best men, franklins or grith-men, shall be chosen in every Rape to divide the tithes and doles and take the oaths of men.

<p>Every man is bound to come to these meetings that hath to pay tithe, or get a man for him that shall do the law business on his behalf, and be a man fit to be handselled.

<p>If he come not before midday and there be none to stand for him, then he must pay an outlaw-fine of three marks, and he shall then pay the tithe as it falls to his share. Then the money of men shall be reckoned to see how much it is. They shall value land and loose money, and shall value that money that at the lawful flitting-days was free from debt. Every man shall value and reckon his own property. And when he hath counted over his fee and reckoned it, then he shall take the book in hand or a cross, and name witnesses in witness thereto. He shall declare that &lsquo;I take an oath on the book, a lawful oath, and say this to God, that I owe as much money as I have now reckoned or less.&rsquo;...

<p>The Rape-men that are appointed shall divide every man&apos;s tithe into four parts, save it be less than an ounce tithe, and then it is right that it be put into one place.

<p>One-fourth of the tithe shall be given to needy folk within the Rape, such as need to have pauper-help in that season, and divide it among them, giving them more that have more need thereof....

<p>A second fourth of the tithe the bishop shall have....

<p>Now there are left two-fourths, that is half the tithe of each man, that shall be laid out on the church, and on the wages of the priests, to every church as the bishop divideth the tithes, and it shall be paid into those men&apos;s hands that are the patrons of the church to which the tithe is dealt or shared out. He shall buy the services or hours of the priest as far as he can, and provide such other things for the needs of the church as are needed, as far as the money will go....

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of Weapon-bearing in Church.</hi> Men shall not bear weapons in church <pb id=pb624 n=624>or oratory that is licensed for services to be held in, and they shall not set them against the church gable or the church walls. And these are reckoned weapons under this head&mdash;ax and sword and spear and cutlass and halberd. If a man break this law he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine....

<milestone unit=tb>

<p><hi>Of Farming an Estate.</hi> If a man dwell on a glebe or church estate, he shall keep up the houses and garths so that the land be not spoilt or wasted, and if the land be wasted or spoilt in his holding thereof, he shall make such amends to the church as five neighbours declare it to be worth on the book.

<p>If a man better church land he shall have God&apos;s thanks therefor, but he may not get amends therefor.


<div2>
<head><hi rend=sc>Of Rape-parting</hi>.</head>

<p>Law-rapes we shall have here in the land. And that is a lawful Rape wherein are twenty franklins or more, though it may be fewer only if the Laws-court-men have given leave.

<p>The franklins that are reckoned in the Rape-reckoning shall be [such as are] bound to pay Moot-fare-pay. Though men break up their Rapes into fourths or trithing, or as they wish to have it, for the allowances of food or the sharing-out of tithes, yet it is right that there be <hi>never</hi> fewer [franklins] in a Rape than twenty.

<p>The Rapes shall be so set that every franklin sit next the others therein. The Rapes shall be all set as they are now.

<p>Five landowners shall be taken to jurisdiction in each Rape to pursue all those men that make default in the Rape, and also for sharing-out of men&apos;s tithes and gifts of food <hi>or</hi> doles, and giving oaths to men....



<div1 n=9 id=s3.9>
<head><ab type=divNum>§ 9.</ab> CHURCH CHARTERS.</head>


<p>Crosses and churches were known in Iceland all along from the days of the Settlement. The Book of Settlement tells us, and place-names bear witness to the same, how the Irish Settlers and Christianised Norsemen, coming from their home in the Isles of the West, used at their arrival to raise a cross (of such make, one thinks, as is still found in Iona), and there they held their prayers. So Lady Aud (Ld. II. <hi rend=bold>14.</hi> 8), and in I. <hi rend=bold>6.</hi> 5, the very prayer uttered is recorded. Prayers, not preaching, being the chief thing, churches would be of rarer occurrence; yet one church is on record, namely, Ld. I. <hi rend=bold>6</hi>, where we meet with a singular phenomenon&mdash;the great heathen temple at the All-moot on Keelness, and a church dedicated to S. Patrick at Esjuberg, standing for three generations side by side as it were, within two miles distance of one another. At that church, by the way, was preserved the old Gospel-book, written in Irish characters [9th century?]. Some of the Kirkbys must go back to the same date; for instance, Kirkby in Side (Ld. IV. <hi rend=bold>16.</hi> 1). But cross or church, whatsoever was Christian, it was all of Irish descent. In 981 the first mission arrived in Iceland; between that date and 1000 only one church is recorded to have been built,&mdash;that at Ridge (see p. 380).

<pb id=pb625 n=625><p>Christianity being officially and nationally accepted, of course at once led to the building of churches (see p. 329). But to find out what churches were built in the early times of the Change of Faith, scanty and scattered notices must be picked up here and there in the Classic Literature that has come down to us. Most of the churches put up during this period would seem to have been timbered shortly after the national vote of 1001, and in the few years between 1016&ndash;24, when the influence of S. Olave was felt. During the fifty years that followed 1030 little seems to have been done. For the West there is, as usual, somewhat fuller information, but we may well suppose what took place there to be a fair standard by which to reckon what happened elsewhere, for the impulse was universal.

<p>Sholto drops silently out of our recorded history; his end is not told, but, if it had taken place soon after the Conversion, it would hardly have escaped notice, and if, as is likely, he survived it some years, being a man of wealth, position, and piety, it is pretty certain that he would have built a church at his own place in Theorsar-dale.

<p>Gizor&apos;s church at <hi>Scalholt</hi> developed, as we see from Hunger-waker, into the chief cathedral of Iceland, associated with the names of many good and godly men.

<p>Taking the <hi>West Country</hi> first, there was Gelle&apos;s church at Holyfell, 1001&ndash;8, burnt down and succeeded by a second at <hi>Holyfell</hi>, c. 1020&ndash;30, which well exemplifies a phenomenon that we meet with elsewhere&mdash;namely, that when famous heathen shrines to which respect was paid and resort made, were disestablished and discredited, their place was taken by a Christian church, which succeeded to the renown and popularity of the older fane, this being of course due to the influence of the great family of chiefs still living there.

<p>There being no church in the Dales (see Reader, pp. 20, 21), the body of Ceartan, who was slain in 1003, was taken to Thorstan Egilsson&apos;s church at <hi>Borg</hi>, which was then newly consecrated and in its white weeds. But when Snorre left Holyfell he built a church at <hi>Tongue</hi> (1009&ndash;30, Eyrbyggia, 1864, pp. 125&ndash;6), where in 1023 he buried his mother. There, too, was laid Borc his uncle, and there his own grave was made in 1031, as is declared in the last chapters of Eyrbyggia Saga (see above, p. 134, and in the Mela-book fragment, p. 135).

<p>In Hitar-dal, at the church at <hi>Walldr</hi>, was buried Beorn the Hot-river-dale champion, S. Olave&apos;s contemporary; and in Beorn&apos;s Saga and one MS. of S. Olave&apos;s Life, there is told the tale of the garter of S. Olave, its miraculous resistance to decay, and its use as a chalice-cover in Walldr church.

<p>At the All-moot the <hi>Ting-wald</hi> or <hi>Thing-field</hi> church (see Libellus, p. 290) probably occupied the site of the heathen temple to which Grim ministered. S. Olave (c. 1020) sent timber out for this church, and Harald Hardrede some years afterwards gave the bell. So it is nonsense in Nial&apos;s Saga, ch. 144, where, in the episode of Eyolf Bolwerksson, there is talk of dead bodies being taken to the church at the All-moot.

<p>The church of <hi>Red-leek</hi> [<hi>Rauda-leykar</hi>] is mentioned in Liósvetninga <pb id=pb626 n=626>Saga, and it was a tiny church of the older type, as appears from the story (see vol. ii. p. 409).

<p>In the South-East we should expect Flose, in spite of the hereditary cult of Frey in his family and story of his connection with the Swine-fell spirit, to have built a church on his great estate near Swine-fell, and in all probability Hall had a church on his estate, and the name <hi>Kirkby</hi> speaks this way, but there is little evidence as to the early history of the last place, save the gloss in Nial&apos;s Saga, ch. 97.

<p>In the North there are fewer churches noticed than in the West. Thorkel Crafla had a church in <hi>Hawk-dale</hi>, as Cristne Saga witnesses. Further, if we may trust the end of Glum&apos;s Saga, Glum was buried at <hi>Forn-haye</hi>, the only church in Harrow-dale, N. Eyfirth (see p. 479). Snorre (see ii. 607) the son of Carlsemne founds a church at <hi>Glaumby</hi> in Shaw-frith. The famous church of <hi>Holar</hi>, the northern cathedral, was, according to Bishop John&apos;s Life, due to Oxe Sholtosson, but we believe this foundation must be earlier than the first half of the 11th century. We should assign a date between 1009&ndash;30 to it, for we take Oxe to be the son of Sholto Thordsson, named in Gretti&apos;s Saga, ch. 70, as dwelling at Hof in Sholto-dale, and accordingly great-grandson of Sholto Skalpsson the Settler.

<p>In the South we should expect Thorgils Scarleg to have built a church. The stone church Illugi priest Ingemund&apos;s son was building at <hi>Broad-bowster</hi> is mentioned above in Mantissa. Thord was priest at <hi>Reykholt</hi> in the middle of the 11th century.

<p>These churches were all founded by great chiefs for their own benefit, and the endowments given of the pure goodwill of the founder. There was, in fact, as may be clearly seen from the evidence supplied by Libellus and Hunger-waker, no church establishment in Iceland or general organization till the days of Islaf, or more exactly, till after the first ten years of Bishop Gizor.

<p>With these two men, the pious Islaf and the prince-bishop Gizor, begins a new order of things. Christianity was ordered and established, diocesan organization was carried out by a succession of able and vigorous rulers. From the death of Gizor&apos;s mother we may date the establishment in Iceland, marked by the endowment of <hi>Scalholt</hi>, the seat of the bishopric. The rebuilding of the cathedral church itself is connected with this endowment. To Gizor was owing the <hi>census of franklins</hi> taken, we cannot doubt, for tithe purposes, the <hi>Tithe-Law</hi> carried in the All-moot in 1196, the establishment of a second bishopric in the North. To Gizor must be referred, one may be sure, though there is no direct statement thereon in our authorities, the systematic parcelling out of the land into parishes, the regulation of the duties and rights of parish priests, the ordinances respecting the distribution and levying of tithes. Behind the brief but pregnant notices of his activity in Libellus there is much to be divined. It was, in fact, Gizor that gave the Icelandic Church the bent it kept throughout the Middle Ages down to the Reformation. The <hi>Christian Law Section</hi> carried by <pb id=pb627 n=627>Gizor&apos;s sainted successor Thorlac, and by his northern fellow-bishop Cetil c. 1125, completed Gizor&apos;s work of organization.

<p>The foundation and endowment of new churches by the great chiefs marks the renewed activity roused by Bishop Gizor&apos;s exertions, and though the records are scanty, there are some notices from which we can see the extent of the movement. Thus Sæmund the historian founded a church at <hi>Odde</hi>, as we know from the testimony of his grandson. Thord founded a church at <hi>Water-firth</hi>, to which his great-grandson bore witness in the famous Water-firth case (see p. 637). Brand set up a church at <hi>House-fell</hi> in Borg-frith, as we are told in Laxdæla Saga. A great church was built and endowed at <hi>Thing-eyre</hi>, c. 1120, in pursuance of the vow taken by Bishop John on behalf of the whole Moot after the long drought of 1110. Oxe&apos;s church at <hi>Holar</hi> having been burnt, was rebuilt in 1105&ndash;6.

<p>There might be more instances given, but these will suffice. But a still more characteristic feature of the time is the pressing of the chiefs and heads of great families to take orders. The list of 1143 will show how far this movement had gone. After 1190 Bishop Paul took a <hi>Church-census</hi>, whereby he found that there were in his diocese of Scalholt 220 churches and 290 priests. The taking of orders and endowing of churches by the great chiefs led to great difficulties, when the time came in Iceland (as it had come in England with Anselm and Thomas) for existing facts to be interpreted by the light of the new ideas that were quickening the Church, and out of it sprang the quarrels over the Glebe Endowments which plunged all Iceland into strife in the 13th century.

<p>The <hi>mal-dage</hi> or charter of endowment was originally somewhat of the nature of a private deed, a covenant for a beloved daughter&apos;s dowry rather than a conveyance in mortmain<note n=1 id=n627.1>Cf. IV Conc. Orleans, c. 33, <hi rend=sc>A.D.</hi> 541: &lsquo;<foreign lang=la>Si quis in agro suo aut habet aut postulet dioecesim primum et terras ei deputet sufficienter et clericos qui ibidem sua officia impleant.</foreign>&rsquo; See Bright&apos;s Early English Church History, Note F.</note>. The patron of the church often gave a handsome endowment from his own home estate. No doubt pride as well as piety had its influence in stimulating his generosity, but he was usually willing to act generously, for was it not a family matter, and was he not to have the administration of the endowment? Would it not be one of his own kindred or clients that would serve the church under the patronage of himself and his heirs? But the reign of Canon Law was at hand, and the early prince-bishops were followed by lawyer-bishops who did not sympathise with the claims of the great patrons, but were moved partly by zeal for the church, partly by love of order, partly by the absolute need of proper discipline and the advance of new ideas of church prerogative, to interpret these charters in a spirit utterly different from that with which the first founders executed them. The patrons, their assignees and heirs, resisted the bishops&apos; encroachments, and after a long and bitter struggle the matter was finally settled by the <pb id=pb628 n=628>acceptance of the Norwegian King&apos;s ruling. Of these important documents we here give representative specimens.

<p>They were first legally required to be in writing by the Christian Law Section (possibly carrying out a rule of Bishop Gizor&apos;s), and were kept at the church ; but later, probably under the Norwegian bishops, men of order who needed and were used to records, Registers were set up at the cathedrals, wherein copies of these documents, and probably in many cases the documents themselves, were entered, for the sake of security and convenience of reference. What the original <hi>mal-dage</hi> was like we can see from the only specimen extant, the Reek-holt Charter, a broad-sheet of vellum (admirably facsimiled some years ago, and accessible to English readers in Sir Richard Burton&apos;s Iceland), on which entries are made from time to time of endowments as they are bestowed. Owing to fires and other damage all others of these broadsheet church charters have unluckily perished.

<p>Moreover the Registers themselves have also perished, but of them we have two copies of the paper age. The one, D. 12 of the Reykjavik Library, bears this attestation of its contents and age: &lsquo;All that is here before written in this book have I, Bearne Marteinsson, written according to old charter-quires and charter-leaves, clear and good at Scalholt, anno 1601, in the Short-days [dead of winter]<note n=1 id=n628.1>D. 12.&mdash;&lsquo;<foreign lang=is>Allt það sem her er fyrir skrifað í þessare bók hefeg Biarne Marteins son skrifað eftir g&aolig;mlum Máldaga-kverum og Máldaga-bloðum léttum og gódum í Skálholte, anno 1601 um skamdeige.</foreign>&rsquo;</note>.&rsquo; The other, AM. 263, states that it was &lsquo;compiled according to old charters 1598<note n=2 id=n628.2>AM. 263.&mdash;&lsquo;<foreign lang=is>Samanskrifuð eftir gomlum máldogum 1598.</foreign>&rsquo;</note>.&rsquo; Thus these paper copies were taken about the time when John Egilsson was making his abstracts from Hunger-waker and writing his Aubrey-like Lives of the 16th century bishops. It is also possible that Bishop Odd, who encouraged John, may have suggested the taking of these copies.

<p>The original books from which D. 12 and AM. 263 are taken, perished in the fire at Scalholt in 1630, as did also several later collections of Registers, that of Bishop Wilchin of c. 1400 among them.

<p>Next comes the question of the age and correctness of these Register copies. What criterions have we for determining this? First, we must examine the one original, the Reek-holt broad-sheet vellum. The <hi>first hand</hi> of this document is of course præ-Snorrean; it has been put to c. 1181, to S. Thorlac&apos;s time, by pure guess-work. We should rather suppose it to be earlier, say c. 1140, on diplomatic grounds. The <hi>second hand</hi> is imitative of the first, and though it is dated after 1205&ndash;6, and somewhere between that time and 1230, it is by no means a characteristic hand of the early 13th century. The <hi>third hand</hi>, Snorrean, is frankly of 13th century type. The <hi>fourth</hi>, a fine script, the Editor would place after 1250, say 1270.

<p>Now it is to be noted that in the Register-text only the three first handwritings of this Reek-holt charter are entered; <hi>ergo</hi>, we are entitled <pb id=pb629 n=629>to conclude that the Registers were compiled before the fourth handwriting was written on the charter&mdash;that is, somewhere between the years 1240 and 1270.

<p>The Editor can well remember the mouldering MS. of Bearne Marteinsson, when it was in the hands of his friend Mr. Sigurdsson in 1855, and he noticed that a middle part of D. 12 was evidently an old, separate, and single collection, the rest of Bearne&apos;s work being gathered from other sources. The Editor at that time urged Mr. Sigurdsson to print D. 12 as it stood, so that the student might have the means of seeing the original composition of that collection; but he preferred to try and arrange them in chronological order, and broke up the MS. order. Owing to this decision, which was certainly a mistake, there being no date to any charter in the MSS., a rough guess had in many cases to be made as to the time when a given document was executed. No dependence therefore must be placed upon the hypothetical dates of the Icelandic Diplomatarium. One is left in fact to internal evidence, which, as the spelling was freely altered by the scribes, is not always easy to estimate, and to the few pieces of external evidence which are to be found in Sturlunga, the Annals, &amp;c.

<p>Most of the charters we give here come from the old collection in D. 12.

<p>There is another question to be settled. How far do these copies faithfully transmit the original broad-sheet vellums? We are struck by the fact that, though many of these deeds go back some time before 1250, there is little trace of their original type; little mention of patron&apos;s rights and privileges; few marks of the original intentions of such endowments. Yet in the great suit of the Men of Odde in the South over the glebe originally conveyed to spiritual uses by Sæmund the historian, and the Water-firth suit in the West, there was full knowledge shown of the original charters. In Arne&apos;s Saga there is express mention of the founder&apos;s rights; and endowment charters are by law read at the Fifth Court. There is a difficulty here.

<p>The answer seems to be that the bishops, who assuredly did not have these charters copied out of antiquarian curiosity, were rather concerned in their registries with the rights of the Church than the privileges and reservations of the founders and patrons. Moreover, inasmuch as many of the founders&apos; claims were held by them to be contrary to the Canon Law, and some even sinful in themselves (as one can see from the Bishops&apos; Lives), they would almost certainly refuse to register such provisions, since they could not allow them to be binding or hold them worthy of mention.

<p>As to the contents of the Charters they speak for themselves. The rights of the Church are usually first recorded, and its burdens or liabilities follow, tithe-rules and bounds and burial-rights are often noted. The saint the church is dedicated to<note n=1 id=n629.1><hi>Dr. Cederschiold</hi>, in his little study on the older Icelandic Church Charters, 1887, gave a list of Saints to which churches were dedicated in the Middle Ages in Iceland, <pb>drawn from charters mostly of the 13th century; but it is difficult to get a list at all complete or even representative, because it was the custom to dedicate churches to several saints, and because very little information is forthcoming for many churches. Dr. Cederschiold&apos;s list includes:&mdash;

<list rend="columns(3)">
<item>The Trinity.
<item>Christ.
<item>Mary Mother of God.
<item>Apostle Peter.
<item><ditto>Apostle</ditto> Andrew.
<item><ditto>Apostle</ditto> James.
<item><ditto>Apostle</ditto> John.
<item><ditto>Apostle</ditto> Paul.
<item>S. John Baptist.
<item>S. Stephen.
<item>S. Nicholas, bishop.
<item>S. Martin, bishop.
<item>S. Clement.
<item>S. Laurence.
<item>S. Germanus.
<item>S. Gallus.
<item>S. Sebastian.
<item>S. Vincent, deacon.
<item>S. Blaise, bishop.
<item>S. Augustin.
<item>S. Denis.
<item>S. Thorlac, bishop.
<item>S. Olave, King and Martyr.
<item>S. Mary Magdalen.
<item>Eleven Thousand Virgins.
<item>S. Agnes.
<item>S. Agatha.
<item>S. Barbara.
<item>S. Lucy.
<item>All Hallows.
</list></note> is not always mentioned, <pb id=pb630 n=630>nor is the founder&apos;s name always given, though we may suppose that the earliest deeds would generally have recorded these facts. There is sometimes an inventory of the church moveables. Three of the originals are printed on p. 636; the rest are translated.

<p>We also print a version, the <hi>inspeximus</hi> of the judgment of 1273, on the cases of S. Nicholas&apos;s Church at Odde and S. Olave&apos;s in Water-firth, and the King&apos;s final settlement of the Glebe case in 1297.


<p><hi>Charter of Bank-land in Borg-firth to the Hospital there.</hi>

<p><hi rend=sc>Tanne</hi> [Irish: Tadgh] and <hi rend=sc>Hall-frith</hi> they two gave half Bank-land to the hospital that is there, by the counsel of bishop Gizor, and by the leave of the heirs. There go therewith ten cows and sixty ewes, and a new boat.

<p>Tanne shall have the rule of the place as long as he lives, and then the bishop that is at Scalholt. And the man that dwelleth there shall feed all men that he think it well should be fed.&mdash;D. I. p. 169 (D. 12, fol. 68).


<p><hi>Charter to Church under Raun.</hi>

<p>They two, <hi rend=sc>Tanne</hi> [Tadgh] and <hi rend=sc>Hall-frith</hi>, have given to the church under Raun half that land with all the fruit of the land, sixteen cows, and ten oxen four winters old, and sixty old wethers, three horses, two hundred four-ell ounces of church furniture. There shall go herewith a silver chalice, a church-hanging, five bells.

<p>There shall be a priest having his abode there, and a deacon, and a poor woman. And if the deacon cannot be got there, then there shall be a poor man in his place. Then there will be two poor folk there. The man that dwelleth there shall feed one night about every man whom he think it well should be fed.

<p>They two, <hi rend=sc>Tanne</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Hall-frith</hi>, give this to the governance of the bishop at Scalholt, who shall be warden of this homestead, and keep up the expenses that are herein declared.

<p>Bishop Thorlac [Thorlac I] will have the tithes paid there of the fourteen homesteads that he named when he was there at the homestead.&mdash;D. I. p. 74 (D. 12, fol. 62).


<p><hi>Charter to S. Mary&apos;s Church at Hot-river-ness.</hi>

<p>Mary&apos;s church at Hot-river-ness owneth Hot-river-ness land with all its profits.    She hath ten cows, and a hundred ewe-worth sheep, ten <pb id=pb631 n=631>hundred ells in farm implements and house furniture, twenty weights of meat, except of seals and fishes.

<p>This is the outlay for this property, that there shall be a priest domiciled, and sing all the services; and every other day two masses in the Long-fast [Lent]; every day a mass through the Yule-fast [Advent], and ever when mass should be said when the priest is at home; vigils every evening in Lent, then lections. There shall be lights every night from the later Mary-mass till Pask [Easter] week is over.

<p>There also shall be two poor women that can help themselves out of the kin of <hi rend=sc>Thorhall</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Stanwend</hi>.

<p><hi rend=sc>Iorwend</hi> shall be warden of this property, and his heirs, if the bishop think them fit withal, or else one out of Thorhall&apos;s kin or Stanwend&apos;s, who the bishop wills.

<p>The church hath three altar-cloths, two candlesticks, two bells, two hand-basins, and a hanging to go round the church, ten marks of wax.

<p>At four marks of wadmal the priest shall be fed.

<p>Burial is allowed there.&mdash;D. I. p. 275 (D. 12, fol. 103).


<p><hi>Charter to Christby at Upsal in Land-brot.</hi>

<p><hi rend=sc>Christby</hi> that standeth at Upsal hath <hi rend=sc>Godwine</hi> given to God Almighty with all the good thereof. There shall also go with it six cows, thirty-five ewes and wether sheep. There shall also go with it twenty-one ounces worth in kind, a measure of corn, five horses&apos; loads of rush-wood, eighty of sand-grass, off Highton-mell, and they shall be stored there, the sand-grass closes that lie between Highton-mell and Harrow-dale-mell shall also go therewith, the shore-rights that are at the mouth of the glen, three-hundred-and-twenty which ought to go with the three lands which Godwine established.

<p>There shall one poor woman go therewith. There shall be paid half-a-mark of wadmal at Kirkby on Shear-Thursday. There is no guest-maintenance ordered. He may feed whom he will at pleasure. He shall not be bound to be in any quest <hi>or</hi> summonses, nor to pay moot-fare-fee. There shall every man, inlaw or outlaw, be buried at the church that shall lose his life on this land. There shall also only be that franklin there whom the Rape-rulers shall give leave there to be withal.&mdash;D. I. p. 199 (from a vellum scroll).


<p><hi>The Christby at Keld-gnup</hi> or <hi>Keld-peak in the Side</hi> [<hi>S. Peter&apos;s</hi>].

<p><hi rend=sc>Christby</hi>, which <hi rend=sc>Bearnhedin</hi> and <hi rend=sc>Ogmund</hi> established at Keld-peak, is given to Christ and Peter, the land thereof with all its outcome and profits. There follow [with it] six cows and forty ewes, and one sheep a year old, and fourteen ounces, six-ell ounces, in cloth and corn-meal, or half a weight of meat.

<p>This is the outlay <hi>or</hi> charges upon Christby: there shall be there a helpless woman, but one that is able to don and doff her clothes. A half-mark of wadmal shall be payable in Kirkby shear-day or Peter&apos;s-mass, and the salary to the priest besides. There shall also be given a man&apos;s portion on the first day of Yule and Pask-day and Whit-Sunday; and the sheep&apos;s milk of all the flock shall be given at Peter&apos;s-mass at the morning meal. A lamb shall be marked out of the weaning-fold, and Peter shall take the risk thereof, and it shall be given [him] at the harvest-tide when it comes back. All needy men and they that are journeying on errands shall be fed.&mdash;D. I. p. 201 (from a vellum scroll).


<pb id=pb632 n=632><p><hi>Charter to the Church at Asolf-scal under Ey-fell.</hi>

<p>This is the church charter at Asolf-scal that she [the church] owneth half the land, and six cows, and a steer one winter old, four bells, and hangings to go round, a silver chalice, and a set of mass raiment, three altar-cloths, four candlesticks, two hand-basins, an incense-bowl, and a banner, three books, a psalter and an obit scroll, and a service [?] book.

<p>Here shall the house-tithe of men be paid also from the Northern Asolf-scal and from Peak. And thither there shall be bound to be mass sung every fourth lawful holyday and a mass for the souls one day in the week of Lent, save the first and last week. Such mass-singing was also bound to be at Inner Asolf-scal. Twelve masses at Northern Asolf-scal.

<p>This is the outlay here. That a priest shall have his abode here, and sing every holyday, and not hire him out any matins. There shall mass be sung three days not holydays in the week when there is no fast, and in Gang fast [Rogations] four. There shall be bound to be a mass sung every Saturday when the priest is at home, and every day at Yule-fast [Advent], and two masses at Long-fast [Lent]. From the former Mary-mass [Dec. 8] the lights shall be burnt during winter on holydays till the later Mary-mass [March 18], and thenceforward every night till Cross-mass in the spring [May 3]. Wax candles shall be burnt at matins at the holydays that are the most kept. Incense shall be in the censer every day that there are nine lections in the matins at mass.&mdash;D. I. p. 255 (D. 12, fol. 54).


<p><hi>Charter to the Church at Staff&apos;s-holt in Borg-firth.</hi>

<p>This is the charter of Staff&apos;s-holt, according as priest <hi rend=sc>Steane Thorward&apos;s son</hi> made it. He gave to the church all the house land, and twenty cows, one hundred ewe sheep, sixty wether sheep with ewes, sixty winter-old sheep, ten cows-worth of oxen, five horses, fifteen hundred in house furniture and farm furniture also within the walls, three parts of the salmon fishery in Thwart-water, the weir fishery in North-water under the fell, land at Swarf-knoll and Berg-stone, Temple-stead, Lax-holt, Western Shaw-land, Eng-ness [Mead-ness], Strand-mouth, and the wreck-right [jetsam] therewith, commons in West-river-dale on the eastern side, and all Mid-dale-mull, all Beorn&apos;s-dale down from Meal-fell-gil, the sheep-walk in Thwart-water-dale up from the Folds, Rush-ey in Hrod-water, all the eyot whereon Thwart-water-moot is held, Thrall-ey south from Bild&apos;s-hammer [Bild&apos;s-crag].

<p>And here by this charter there shall be three priests, and a mass deacon that shall read at the matins; but if there be one priest at Herd-holt<note n=1 id=n632.1>Text not safe.</note>, there shall be only two priests at Staff&apos;s-holt, for that [Staff&apos;s-holt] is under this. And here, moreover, there shall be two poor women of the kindred of Steane so old that they cannot<note n=2 id=n632.2><ab type=textRef>eige]</ab> om. Cd.</note> work for themselves.&mdash;D. I. p. 179 (D. 12, fol. 66).


<p><hi>Charter to the Church at House-fell in Borg-firth.</hi>

<p>This is the charter of the church at House-fell, that <hi rend=sc>Brand Thorarin&apos;s son</hi> giveth there to the church the land of House-fell, and the other land that pertaineth thereto, with all the profits of the land, that go therewith.

<pb id=pb633 n=633><p>There shall go therewith five cows and thirty ewes, and one hundred four-ell ounces of house furniture and farm implements.

<p>There shall ever be a resident priest. Matins and mass he shall sing every holyday there, and sing mass every day when there are nine lections in the matins. He shall sing mass every fast-day and All Soul-days [Ember-days], every other day through the Yule-fast [Advent], and every day through Long-fast [Lent], and for every holyday that he miss the service there shall be provided three meals for the needy.

<p>There shall lights be burnt in the church from the former Mary-mass [Aug. 14], every holyday till Michaelmas [Sept. 29], and every night from thence till Pask <hi>or</hi> Easter-week be ended.

<p>[Bishop Clong gave leave to bury there at the church the men of the household that died there<note n=1 id=n633.1>[&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;] a later addition. The charter is much older than the date 1170 in D. 1. See Ldn.</note>.]

<p>There shall ever one poor woman be kept at the church on those moneys, whom Brand Thorarin&apos;s son shall choose out of his kin, or his sons. And Brand Thorarin&apos;s son shall be warden of these church properties as long as he will, and then his sons as long as they will. They shall appoint a warden if they will give it up, and if they have no heirs that can take charge of it, then they shall take a man out of their kindred, to be warden of the church property, whom the bishop shall think well fitted withal, that ruleth in Scalholt. And he shall be responsible for the church and all the ornaments thereof against fire and all hurt, that is warden of the church property.&mdash;D. I. p. 217 (D. 12, fol. 71).


<p><hi>Charter to Reek-holt Church</hi> [<hi>S. Peter&apos;s</hi>].

<p>To the church in Reek-holt belongeth the house land with the profit of all the land that pertaineth thereto, twenty cows, a steer two winters old, a hundred-and-thirty [= 150] ewes. There pertaineth thereto five parts of all Grim&apos;s-water, but three parts not save what I will now count up&mdash;that is, all the flood-fence and three parts of the river north of Mid-rock, but the fourth not. There pertaineth thereto also a fourth part of Harrow-pool, after the sixth part is excepted, and the fishing down at Red-water-oyce. There pertaineth thereto three horses no worse than fourteen ounces [worth apiece]. There pertaineth thereto also a [mountain] sheep-walk at the Copses, with the river fishing, a half that pertaineth thereto, and commons in Ram-frith-heath, and the intakes [spots isolated] that she [the church] hath in Fax-dale and Goat-land with the shaw. The shaw in Sand-dale down from Sclack-gil [Slope-gill] round Scal-toft. The mark goeth down from the rocks <hi>or</hi> stones that are called Cloven,&mdash;they stand over against Sand-dale&apos;s river,&mdash;and thence up to the Fell&apos;s-brow. There pertaineth thereto the wood <hi>or</hi> rushes on Thwart-water-lithe for wood for the shieling. A turbary in Stein-thors-stead land, a measure of seed corn sown.&mdash;D. I. p. 279 (<hi>from the original broad-sheet</hi>).

<p>[N.B. <hi>The text of Hands 1, 2, and 3 (dateable 1205, c. 1224, and c. 1230) are given in</hi> Sturl. ii. p. 503.]


<p><hi>Charter of Agreement touching Holy-fell Cloister.</hi>

<p>We have agreed to this agreement, that these&mdash;<hi rend=sc>Gudmund</hi>, <hi rend=sc>Olaf</hi>, and <hi rend=sc>Eyjolf</hi>&mdash;shall take the church estate here at Holy-fell, and hold here canon&apos;s life, if God give the means thereto, as many as there may be <pb id=pb634 n=634>therein while my life shall be, and hold the church estates as long as they wish and are able, and he of them that lives longest, if he be able.

<p>Now I would that one or other, Gudmund or Olaf, take this see [of abbacy] after me, if they take heed to themselves and there come no blemish in their way such as might stand in the way, and if it be not so, then I would that they shall meet together<note n=1 id=n634.1>The text is here corrupt; <hi>for</hi> hefðe fiar ráð <hi>read</hi> hefðe fund.</note> and take an abbot, if so might be I would like it best that he were of my kin, if so it might be with the supervision of the bishop. Now if there be not sufficient means to found a monastery, whatsoever there lack thereto, we have nevertheless established what clerks shall be here&mdash;five that can sing mass [i.e. priests], a deacon and sub-deacon. Two masses every day not a holyday, and also the holydays as the prior will; all other service to be held as seemeth right.

<p>To meet these outlays are these parcels of property, our lands, which go together with the island which the abbot bought then without intake [burden <hi>or</hi> easement?], and with all rents, faggot-wood in Drang-land, and Erne-knoll, twenty cows, two broken oxen and a steer, eight horses at the least, twenty hundred in farm stores and house furniture and the profits thereof that are within walls, a quern, and a seal-net, two boats (one eight-oared, the other six-oared), a hundred books, and mass-vestments, and all other church vestments, four bells and a shrine. All this property I put as worth three-hundred-hundreds, and hundred ells-worth cows-worth of this property as therein is [?].&mdash;D. I. p. 282 (Bp. Wilchin&apos;s Register).


<p><hi>Charter to the Church at Red-leek in Little Hundred</hi> [<hi>S. Mary&apos;s</hi>].

<p>Mary&apos;s Church that standeth at Red-leek owneth all the home land, and Lathe-holt, Lang-ness and Bank, with all their yield, all the islands<note n=2 id=n634.2><hi>Read</hi> eyjar <hi>for</hi> eyrar.</note> that appertain to Hills, three parts of Ingolf&apos;s-head, but two parts owneth he that dwelleth at Eyre-horn. The church owneth half the fishery; she owneth a meadow-strip at Gain-hills. Thirty horses of Red-leek shall be kept in Cross-holt&apos;s-land both winter and summer, fifteen old oxen in the Hill-land, one hundred and sixty wethers shall be kept in the Fell-land; one-third of the commons is on Fold-myre. All the shaws that run out from Sheep-bows-shaw to the shaw that pertaineth to Scam-stead. One strip of shaw that is in the dale at Iokle&apos;s-fell. The cheese-tax through all the hundred between Broad-sand and Loom-peak-sand belongeth to Red-leek. The church owneth fifteen cows, and five cows-worth in oxen, and ninety-five cows-worth in wethers, twelve hundred in choice beasts, fifteen hundred in mass-vestments, all valued. All those glebes<note n=3 id=n634.3>Þing, Cd.</note> that are between Grave-brink and Iokle&apos;s-river, as also the church tithes, save from Sand-fell, belong to the place at Red-leek. The shore rights are not put down here in particular, because they are only those that have before been brought into the Court of Laws. But those that appertain to Long-ness have since been added.

<p>This shall be the outlay of this property, the keep of two priests and a deacon. They shall not sing there less than two masses once a week, and all vigil-days and Ember-days, every day at Long-fast [Lent] and every day at Yule-fast [Advent].

<p>The church owneth the shore between the Fold-water and Hammer-ends, <pb id=pb635 n=635>half with the Sand-fell-men. Another shore she hath south of the Fold-water up to One-anger. The third shore she owneth off Eyre-horn. Two parts of all wreck with the Sand-fell-men [who have one part], but the choice of an eighth part of food jetsam [stranded whales and the like].&mdash;D. I. p. 248 (from a vellum quire).

<p>[The text is printed in Sturl. (1878) ii. p. 503.]


<p><hi>Charter to Mell Church in Borg-firth.</hi>

<p>This is the charter of the church at Mell, that she hath all the house land intakeless [without charge], with all the profits and rents that <hi rend=sc>Thor-lac</hi> [fl. 1150] bought and <hi rend=sc>Magnus</hi> [his son] gave withal.

<p>These are the landmarks between Mell and Belby-holt&mdash;a flat stone north of the mouth of Scal-beck and up from the stone to Scal-holt, and thence to Titling&apos;s-holt, and thence in an eye-line to Ward-holt, and thence to Byrgi&apos;s-holt, and thence in an eye-line to Fish-beck-stockade <hi>or</hi> folds, and then to Fowl-tump, a short way from the town-garth at Fish-beck, the stack-garth-mead to Fish-beck water-meadow <hi>or</hi> water-trenches, and out of Fowl-tump to Earth-crosses south in the water-meadow or trenches by the beck, and an eye-line thence to the stone up over <hi>the</hi> Holt&apos;s-foot, and an eye-line out of the Holt to Cringle-tump, and an eye-line thence to Land-slip-swamps as it goes from the south to the Mere. The fence goes out of Mell-mere down to Maiden-mere out by the fence at Ridge. Another fence runs down out of the town-garth at Ridge, and down to the gill west of the fenced acre at Ridge.

<p>The church owneth all the wreck thence from the gill up to the stone north of Scal-beck-mouth.

<p>The shepherd at Mell hath a right to sit in the town-garth at Ridge.

<p>The church hath all the mountain sheep-walks that lie between Force-beck and Tongue-river.

<p>The church hath an everlasting right to Fish-beck, a mark of wax or a sheep at harvest-tide as good as the wax.

<p>There shall also be two priests, or a priest and deacon and a poor woman of Magnus&apos;s kin.

<p>There is leave to bury all corpses, that men will bring thither and may be brought to church [not in ban].

<p>There pertain to the church the tithes of fifteen homesteads and half of the haven; there pertain thereto the churches at Leek, and Havem, and three oratories, and there is due six marks from each.&mdash;D. I. p. 271 (D. 12, fol. 120).


<p><hi>Charter to Withey Cloister.</hi>

<p>This charter was made at the All-moot by the counsel of bishop Magnus, and Snorre Sturla&apos;s son brought it up at the Laws Court, and named witness.

<p>That between Reek-ness and Boz-water there shall be paid of every homestead where cheese is made such a loaf [of cheese] as is there made to the church-estate in Withey every harvest, and in return all they that do or pay this homage to the church-estate share in the prayers of the brethren and clerks of the church-estate, as it is set in the rule every day with all those men that do good or pay rent to the church-estate for charity or the good of souls.

<p>These were witnesses: Magnus Gudmund&apos;s son; and Asmund his brother; Arne Magnusson; the sons of Thord, Thorlaf, Bead-war, and Marcus; Tait Thorwald&apos;s son; Sigurd Jonsson; Styrme Carason; <pb id=pb636 n=636>Ketil Thorlac&apos;s son; Orm Codran&apos;s son; Styrkar Swein-beorn&apos;s son; Jerusalem-Beorn; Codran Swart-head&apos;s son.&mdash;D. I. p. 496 (AM. 263).

<p>[The text is printed in Sturl. (1878) ii. p. 400.]


<p><hi>Charter to Eyre Church in Elfet&apos;s-frith.</hi>

<p>This is the charter to Eyre in Elfet&apos;s-frith, that there shall be one priest there.

<p>The church owneth hangings round all the church, two bells, a silver chalice, four altar-cloths, four candlesticks, three hand-basins, three incense-vessels and <hi>one</hi> fire-bearer, three rood crosses and <hi>one</hi> picture, ten hundreds in choice cattle, ships and nets or farm furniture or house ornaments, ten hundred in kind, beside four cows, and an ox with a cow.

<p>There is in another place ten hundred in kind, which <hi rend=sc>Gudrun</hi> Sweinbeorn&apos;s daughter [H. 1200] gave to the church.

<p>And all this property is rightly paid in the land according to + worthing<note n=1 id=n636.1>Testimony sworn on the Rood.</note>.

<p>To it appertain the tithes of Holmslatr and Orlygsstead, and all between, save the franklin&apos;s tithe in Outer Lang-dale that is the richest in the dale. Thence shall they pay to Eyre three marks every season, whether there be a domiciled priest at Lang-dale or not.

<p>A fourth of a cheese every franklin that owes moot-fare-fee in Eyre-moot ought to pay to Eyre.

<p>Mass is sung from Eyre at Holmslatr, and at Leet, at Bank and to Drangs, in Oxeney, in Lang-dale, at Car-stead.&mdash;D. I. p. 465 (D. 12, fol. 68).


<q rend=block lang=is><p>Nicholas kirkja í Mýnese á tio hundroð í lande. Þar scal syngja annan hvárn dag log helgan, oc enn fiórða hvern ótto s&oelig;ng oc kaupa þrim morcom, oc scal heima tiund. Sá scal hafa heimilis-prest es býr í Mýnese ef hann vill, enda misse enge annur kirkja.

<p>Lýsa scal þar frá Máriu-messo vnz líðr Pasca vico fyrer þá daga alla es sungen es messa efter um dagenn.&mdash;D. I. p. 249 (D. 12, fol. 130).

<milestone unit=tb rend=space>

<p>Germanus kirkja á Streite á land þat allt, kýr tvær oc tottogo oc fiórtán aura í bús gognom, oc scal fylgja kven-gildr ómage fióm þessom. Þar scal syngja ii messor ens fiórða tigar log-helga daga, en til ero skilðer í þessom s&oelig;ng, Cyndil-messa, Máriu-messa en fyrre oc annarr dagr Pasca. Þar scal syngja átta daga rúm-helga, oc es í því tale Osco dagr oc Germanus dagr. Þessar tíðer scal kaupa tveim morcom vaðmála, oc liggr hon under Heydala kirkjo oc þangat scal tiund gialda.

<p>Lýsa scal oc vetrenn fyrer þá daga es sungen es messa efter um dagenn.&mdash;D. I. p. 250 (D. 12, fol. 130).

<milestone unit=tb rend=space>

<p>Máriu kirkja á Gufu-nese á xx<hi rend=sup>c</hi> í lande oc kýr ij cross oc cloccor; silfr-calec oc messo-fot, tiolld um hverfis, alltara clæðe iij, Vatn-ker, glóða-ker oc elld-bera, slopp oc munn-laugar ij; lás oc kerta sticor ij.

<p>Þar scal tiund heima af ix bæjom oc svá groftr. Þar scal vesa prestr, oc syngja allar heimilis tíðer, ij messor hvern dag um Langa-fosto: messa hvern vígiliu dag, hvern dag um Ióla-fosto ij messor, nacquern Imbro dag á Ióla-fosto, oc of haust.

<p>Lýsa frá Mário-messer unz líðr Pásca vico.&mdash;D. I. p. 269 (D. 12, fol. 80).</q>


<p><hi>Inspeximus 1518 of Judgment of 1273 in Archbishop&apos;s Court at Bergen.</hi>

<p>We, brother Ogmund by God&apos;s long-suffering abbot of Widey, to all good men to wit, by this our letter patent, that we have inspected <pb id=pb637 n=637>and seen the old register of the holy church of Scalholt, running thus word by word as here standeth written.

<p>On a day appointed of the ides of July, there were before Us our worthy brother Arne bishop at Scalholt, on behalf of his church, and the layman named Sighwat Halfdan&apos;s son, on behalf of himself and his brethren, and Einar Thorwald&apos;s son, for his brethren.

<p>Then the bishop aforesaid brought before the court his petition in this manner as is here said:&mdash;&lsquo;To the worthy lord John, archbishop. I, Arne bishop at Scalholt claim this before God and you against Sighwat Halfdan&apos;s son, that he holdeth and calleth his the church of S. Nicholas in Odde, as regardeth the administration and all the outcome thereof, together with his brethren. Now, inasmuch as Sighwat ought to make answer here for them all, therefore we make petition that ye adjudge to Holy Church all the rights that she ought to have, and to me and my lawful successors the free possession and administration of the church, such as belongeth to the Scalholt bishop according to the law.&rsquo;

<p>This answer made Sighwat Halfdan&apos;s son to bishop Arne&mdash;that he thought that the disposition should stand which Sæmund Sigfusson made of Oddestead, whereby he disposed of the administration and wardship thereof to himself and his heirs for ever.

<p>Then Sighwat was asked whether Oddestead was called a glebe. He answered he could not gainsay it, but on the understanding that the Odde family had the wardship of it. Sighwat also admitted before the archbishop that Stanwar, his mother, bought Oddestead of Beorn Sæmund&apos;s son and Sæmund Haralld&apos;s son, and afterwards they (Sighwat and his brethren) took it in inheritance after her, and he had to make answer for his brethren in this case, and they had agreed thereto.

<p>In the same way bishop Arne petitioned archbishop John to adjudge to him the rule and administration, as belongeth to Scalholt&apos;s bishop according to God&apos;s law, of the church in Waterfrith out of the hands of Einar Thorwald&apos;s son, that called the church his to administer.

<p>Then Einar&apos;s answer was that his father&apos;s father&apos;s father [great-grandfather] let build the church in Waterfrith, and had it consecrated with this covenant, that he and his right heirs one after the other should own the administration and wardship thereof.

<p>Bishop Arne thus saith to both Sighwat and Einar, that it seemed to him that they may not rightfully own or hold these, and that the worthy lord John archbishop, in dutiful obedience to God and him, had bidden him to put right by the power of his episcopal office especially these and other like matters which he should see needed to be amended in Iceland within the jurisdiction of the Scalholt bishop. He saith also that a bishop hath power over churches and all their property, and that laymen and unlearned men <hi>or</hi> those not clerks may not in any way own them. Now, inasmuch as the laws of Holy Church witness that a foul covenant and one contrary to right cannot be made good by the right of ownership [long continued], and that which is at first of no worth cannot afterwards stand for anything by reason of lapse of time <hi>or</hi> prescription; and inasmuch as no bishop may lawfully alienate from his successors the wardship of these glebes, and no layman may any the more own them or make disposition thereof; and inasmuch as no man may buy or sell a church for a price without great peril to his soul, nor can he that getteth it so lawful hold it.

<p>Upon such considerations the lord bishop Arne hath petitioned us that we should adjudge away from Sighwat and his brethren, and also from Einar Thorwald&apos;s son, the administration and all income and <pb id=pb638 n=638>wardship of [S. Nicholas church in] Oddestead and Olaf&apos;s church in Waterfrith, with all that pertaineth thereto, and quash their defence, so that afterwards neither they nor their heirs may have any claim upon the aforesaid churches.

<p>Now inasmuch as this case is come into our judgment, We give this Sentence in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, that the ownership and disposition, the administration and wardship of [S. Nicholas kirk at] Oddestead and Olaf&apos;s kirk in Waterfrith, with all that pertaineth thereto, whether it be taken or untaken, profit or unprofitable, save that only which hath been used for necessaries and reasonably therewithal, We adjudge to Arne bishop in Scalholt and his lawful successors, to him and them in everlasting possession. And we forbid Sighwat and his brethren, and their heirs also, and Einar and his heirs, to make any claim in this case. This letter was done at Bergen when there was passed from the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ 1273 years, on S. James&apos;s vigil. In testimony whereof we set our seal under this copy. Witness at Videy, a. 1518.


<p><hi>Sept. 14, 1297. The Settlement of the Glebe-case.</hi>

<p>Eirek, by God&apos;s mercy king of Norway, son of king Magnus, sendeth to all men, clerk and lay in Iceland, God&apos;s greeting and his. We do you to wit that we have made peace with bishop Arne of Scalholt, and made full accord with him touching the glebes and lands in the bishopric of Scalholt, by counsel and consent of archbishop Iorund, that the glebes in the bishopric of Scalholt which the churches possess altogether, shall be under the bishop&apos;s administration. But those which laymen own more than the half of, laymen shall hold it, being understood that they shall pay those dues to the clerks which he that first granted the land did appoint, and diminish nothing therefrom. Moreover Scalholt&apos;s bishop shall visit every year every quarter of the land of his bishopric, and ride no oftener to the same place before he have ridden over all his diocese between. He shall ride from home after Peter&apos;s-mass [July 29], and thence onward to harvest-tide as far as the quarters go, and divide his visitation evenly.

<p>Six priests swore with the bishop that this settlement should stand without fail for himself and his successors after him for ever.

<p>We bid you all to hold this as law, but he that shall do otherwise will lie under risk of our wrath and punishment, and also bring upon himself the pope&apos;s ban and God&apos;s wrath and the saints.

<p>And in witness hereof archbishop Iorund and bishop Arne set their seals, with our seal to this settlement. That was done at Augwald&apos;s-ness the even of Cross-mass, in the 17th year of our reign. Lord Finn sealed it. John the clerk wrote it.

<milestone unit=tb>

<p>This settlement is the foundation of the present state of the Church Establishment in Iceland, and it has not been altogether of good effect in modern times. The Church estates in Iceland fall into two classes&mdash;the Church glebes <hi>or</hi> benefices, and those which laymen own, but which pay for the support of the Church and are called Thingabrand. Unfortunately it is precisely the great historic estates&mdash;Herd-holt, Hwamm, Water-frith (won by the Church after the settlement)&mdash;and others which were formerly the seats of rich and powerful families, that have gone more or less to decay, owing to the bad management of the glebes, for naturally the priest was not always the best farmer, often he was <pb id=pb639 n=639>the worst: and so these historic sites have lost their former importance and influence. Husbandry has decayed in consequence, because the man who had the means had not always the will to improve his land and set a good example to his poorer neighbours. There have been few Tussers in Iceland. Of course the Reformation, with its changes often reckless, violent, and ill-judged, and the consequent alien rule of the Icelandic Church from Denmark, has also had its effect upon the condition of these glebes. Had the best men been made priests and encouraged, things might be better now in Iceland as in many other places.


<div2 id=later>
<head><hi rend=sc>The Later Genealogies appended to Landnáma-bóc.</hi></head>

<p>In the introduction to Landnáma-bóc we promised to print later the pedigrees inserted by the medieval copyists, which were eliminated in editing Are&apos;s work.

<p>The number of these pedigrees is not great in Hawk&apos;s and Sturla&apos;s copies, but in Mela-book there are many (41), while as we know that several pages of this vellum are missing and think it likely that Thord missed out some in his transcription, one may reckon that it once contained about 50.

<p>Snorre Marcusson, whose pedigree is given in the Melamen&apos;s pedigree in Sturlunga, vol. ii, p. 489, died about 1302, and must have completed his copy about 1272, see Introduction to Landnáma-bóc. He brings his pedigree down to his father and himself &lsquo;Snorre á Melum&rsquo; (7), his father&apos;s brethren, Thorleif (1) and Bodvar of By (1), his father&apos;s sister Iarngerd (1), his wife Helga (11), his grandmother Snælaug Marcus&apos; mother (2), his mother Hallbera (14), Herdis, Bp. Paul&apos;s wife (1).

<p>Hawk, the son of Sir Erlend, the son of Olaf, being, as we believe, baseborn, never traces pedigrees to himself or Olaf his grandfather, but to his own wife Steinum (3), to Iungerd Erlend&apos;s wife (1), to Iorun his own mother (1), to Walgerd his father&apos;s mother (7).

<p>Doctor J. Thorkelin, Rector of Reykiavik School, thinks that Olaf Erlend&apos;s father was the Olaf but twice spoken of in Sturlunga (1238 and 1240), and we accept this.

<p>Sturla&apos;s pedigrees are traced to Gudny, mother of the Sturlungs (6), and to Sturla of Hvamm (6).


<!-- BEGIN ICELANDIC TEXT -->


<div3 n=I lang=is>
<head>I.</head>

<p>H. = <hi>Lawman Hawk&apos;s</hi> editorial pedigree insertions.

<p><anchor id=a639.1>[Bk. I. 11. 2]. (f. Þórðar í Reykjaholte), f. Solva, f. Þórðar, f. Magnus, f. Þórðar, <anchor id=a639.2>f. H&oelig;lgu, m. Guðnyjar, m. Sturlu ss.<note place=apparatus id=an639.1><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>ss.]</ab> f., Cd.</note> Sigvatz ok Þórðar ok Snorra [Sun Sigvatz <anchor id=a639.3>var Sturla], f. Þúriðar, er Herra Rafn átte: þeirra born Ion korpr, Hallkatla, ok <anchor id=a639.4>Valgerðr, ok Þorgerðr. Syner Hallkotlo ok Ións Petrs sunar voro þeir Sturla ok <anchor id=a639.5>Petr, ok Steinunn dótter, er átte Guðmundr Þorsteins sun Skeggja-sonar.<ab type=lineNum>5</ab>

<p><anchor id=a639.6>[II. 4. 14]. (m. Þorlaks ens Auðga), f. Þorleifs beiskalda, f. Þorleiks, f. Ketils, <anchor id=a639.7>f. Valgerðar, moðor þeirra Þorláks ok Þórðar.

<p><anchor id=a639.8>[II. 15. 1]. Sun Skalla-Gríms var Egill, f. Þorsteins, f. Riflo, f. Skúla, f. Þórðar, <anchor id=a639.9>f. Boðvars, f. Þórðar prestz, f. Boðvars, f. Þórðar, f. Iarngerðar er Herra Erlendr <anchor id=a639.10>Sterke átte: þeirra d. Valgerðr.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p><anchor id=a639.11>[II. 20. 8]. (Hallr Gizorar sun Logmaðr); dotter Rafns var Steinunn, m. Herra <anchor id=a639.12>Rafns ok Hollu ok Herdís<hi>ar</hi><note place=apparatus id=an639.2><ab type=lineNumRef>12.</ab> Herdis, Cd.</note> er Svarthofði Dufgus s. átti: þeirra sun Óli er átit <anchor id=a639.13>Salgerðe Ións d.: þeirra d. Steinunn er Haukr Erlendz son átti.

<p><anchor id=a639.14>[II. 21. 1]. (m. Arnórs ok Eyvindar) f. Steingríms, f. H&oelig;lgu, m. Iorunnar, m. <anchor id=a639.15>Hauks Erlendz sonar.<ab type=lineNum>15</ab>

<pb id=pb640 n=640><p><anchor id=a640.1>[II. 22. 5]. See text.

<p><anchor id=a640.2>[II. 22. 6]. See text.

<p><anchor id=a640.3>[III. 11. 2]. f. Snorra, f. Steinunnar, m. Þorsteins Ranglatz, f. Guðrúnar, m. Hollu, <anchor id=a640.4>m. Flosa, f. Valgerðar, m. Herra Erlenz Sterka.

<p><anchor id=a640.5>(Þorsteins Ranglatz), f. Guðrúnar, m. Hollu, m. Flosa, f. Valgerðar, m. Herra<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a640.6>Erlenz, f. Hauks.

<p><anchor id=a640.7>[IV. 3. 1]. (At the end.) Flosi prestr átti Ragnilldi, d. Barkar á Baugstoðom: <anchor id=a640.8>þeirra born, Biarne ok Einarr, Halla, m. Herra Kristophorus, ok Þórdís, m. frú <anchor id=a640.9>Ingigerðar, m. frú Guðrúnar ok Hallberu. Valgerðr var d. Flosa, m. Herra Erlenz <anchor id=a640.10>Sterka, f. Hauks ok Valgerðar.<ab type=lineNum>10</ab>

<p><anchor id=a640.11>[IV. 3. 1]. [Iorundr Goði], f. Svartz<note place=apparatus id=an640.1><ab type=lineNumRef>11.</ab> Should be, f. Ulfs orgoða, f. Svartz.</note>, f. Loðmundar, f. Sigfuss, f. Sæmundar hins <anchor id=a640.12>Fróða, f. Loptz, er átte Þóru, d. Magnús konungs Berbeins, þeirra s. Jon, f. <anchor id=a640.13>Sæmundar, ok Pals bps ok Sigurðar, f. Jons í Áse, f. Salgerðar, m. Steinunnar <anchor id=a640.14>[Hauk&apos;s wife].

<p><anchor id=a640.15>[IV. 9. 1]. (Skegg-Brodda s.), þeirra ss. vóru þeir Kolbeinn, er fyrr var nefndr,<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a640.16>ok Biarne, f. Biarna, f. Flosa, f. Valgerðar, m. Herra Erlenz, f. Hauks.

<p><anchor id=a640.17>[IV. 11. 2]. (Errobeins stiúps), f. Gríms Glamaðz, f. Ingiallz, f. Gríms, f. þeirra <anchor id=a640.18>Barkar ok Einars, f. Hallkotlu, er átti Rafn Sveinbiarnar s.: þeirra dd., Steinunn, <anchor id=a640.19>m. Herra Rafns, ok Herdís, m. Ála, f. Steinunnar, er Haukr Erlenz s. átte. Borkr <anchor id=a640.20>Gríms s. var f. Ragnhilldar, er Flosi Biarna s. átte. Þeirra born, Einarr, ok Biarni,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a640.21>ok Valgerðr, m. herra Erlenz, f. Hauks. Þórdís var ij d. Flosa, m. frú Ingigerðar, <anchor id=a640.22>m. frú Guðrúnar, ok Hallberu abbadísar. Halla var d. Flosa, m. herra Kristoforus.

<p><anchor id=a640.23>[V. 16. 6]. (Cearvals  Ira  konungs), Þorodz  d. Goða var H&oelig;lga, m. Gríms <anchor id=a640.24>Glomuðs, f. Ingiallz, f. Gríms, f. Barkar, f. Ragnilldar, m. Valgerðar, m. herra Erlenz, <anchor id=a640.25>f. Hauks.<ab type=lineNum>25</ab>

<p><anchor id=a640.26><hi rend=sc>Mantissa</hi>, p. 271, ll. 15&ndash;19, see the text.

<p><anchor id=a640.27>N.B. The Christne Saga has none.



<div3 lang=is n=II>
<head>II.</head>

<p>S. = <hi>Sturlu-book.</hi>  Editor&apos;s pedigree insertions.

<p><anchor id=a640.28>[Bk. I. 11. 2]. (f. Þórðar í Reykjaholte), f. Solva, f. Þórðar, f. Magnus, f. Þórðar, <anchor id=a640.29>f. Helgu, m. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.

<p><anchor id=a640.30>[II. 5. 8]. f. Þórdísar, m. Þórðar, f. Sturlu í Hvammi [ins Gamla, H.].<ab type=lineNum>30</ab>

<p><anchor id=a640.31>[II. 15. 10]. See text.

<p><anchor id=a640.32>[II. 20. 2]. (Son Gils var Þórðr) hann átte Vígdíse Svertings d.: þeirra s. var <anchor id=a640.33>Sturla í Hvammi [Hvamm-Sturla, H.].

<p><anchor id=a640.34>[II. 23. 2]. See text.

<p><anchor id=a640.35>[III. 11. 2]. (m. Bótolfs), f. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.<ab type=lineNum>35</ab>

<p><anchor id=a640.36>[III. 15. 5]. (f. Svertings), f. Vígdísar, m. Sturlu í Hvammi [Hvamm-Sturlu, H.].

<p><anchor id=a640.37>[III. 16. 10]. (f. Þóríðar), m. Þórdísar, m. Vígdísar, m. Sturlu í Hvammi <anchor id=a640.38>[Hvamm-Sturlu, H.].

<p><anchor id=a640.39>[IV. 3. 1]. (Hollu Iorundar d.): þeirra born voru þau Flosi prestr ok Torfi prestr, <anchor id=a640.40>Einarr Bruðr, ok Guðrún er Þórðr Sturlu s. átti, ok Guðrún, er Einarr Bergþórs s.<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a640.41>átte, ok Helga, m. Sigríðar Sigvatz d.

<p><anchor id=a640.42>[IV. 12. 2]. (f. Guðrúnar), m. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.

<p><anchor id=a640.43>[IV. 14. 4]. (Ottars Hval-roar), f. Guðlaugar, m. Þorgerðar, m. Iarngerðar, m. <anchor id=a640.44>Valgerðar, m. Boðvars, f. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.

<p><anchor id=a640.45>[IV. 14. 5, n.]. m. Liótz, f. Iarngerðar, m. Valgerðar, m. Boðvars, f. Guðnýjar,<ab type=lineNum>45</ab> <anchor id=a640.46>m. Sturlu ss. (<hi>A whole suite is here interpolated.</hi>)

<p><anchor id=a640.47>[IV. 17. 4]. (f. Botolfs), f. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.



<div3 n=III lang=is>
<head>III.</head>

<p>M. = <hi>Mela-bók.</hi>  Pedigrees editorial, 41 insertions.

<p><anchor id=a640.48>[Bk. V. 13. 2]. (Biarna ens spaka), f. Skeggja, f. Markus Logsogomannz, f. Valgerðar, <anchor id=a640.49>m. Boðvars, f. Þórðar prestz, f. Þorleifs í Gorðum, ok Markus á Melum, <anchor id=a640.50>ok Boðvars í Bæ.<ab type=lineNum>50</ab>

<pb id=pb641 n=641><p><anchor id=a641.1>Log-skapti var f. Þorsteins holmundz (!), f. Gunnhildar, m. Iodísar<note place=apparatus id=an641.1><ab type=lineNumRef>1.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Iodísar]</ab> emend, according to line 8; Godunar, M&ast;.</note>, m. Vilborgar, <anchor id=a641.2>m. Markus<note place=apparatus id=an641.2><ab type=lineNumRef>2.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Markus]</ab> emend.; Magnus, M&ast;.</note>, f. Snorra á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a641.3>[V. 13. 5]. (m. Þorleifs Beiskalda), f. Alfgerðar<note place=apparatus id=an641.3><ab type=lineNumRef>3.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Alfgerðar]</ab> <hi>read</hi> Alfeiðar.</note>, m. Þorlaks, f. Ketils prestz, <anchor id=a641.4>f. Herdísar<note place=apparatus id=an641.4><ab type=lineNumRef>4.</ab> <ab type=textRef>f. Herd.]</ab> emend.; z Herd., M&ast;.</note>, m. barna Póls biskops.

<p><anchor id=a641.5>[V. 14. 7]. (Geirr Goðe), hann var f. Vígdísar, m. Þorsteins, f. Botolfs, f. Þórdísar,<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a641.6> m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus at Melum, ok Þorbiarnar [? <hi>read</hi> Þorleifs] <anchor id=a641.7>at Melum.

<p><anchor id=a641.8>[V. 15. 2]. Oddr Hallkels s. var f. Iódísar, m. Vilborgar, m. Markus<note place=apparatus id=an641.5><ab type=lineNumRef>8.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Markus]</ab> emend.; Magnus, M&ast;.</note>, f. Mela-Snorra.

<p><anchor id=a641.10>[II. 3. 1]. (Vélaugo), Eyrlygs d. frá Esjuberge: þeirra d. Þóriðr, m. Illuga hins<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a641.11>Svarta, f. Hermundar, f. Hreins, f. Styrmis, f. Hreins ábóta, f. Valdísar, m. Snorra á <anchor id=a641.12>Melum, f. Hallberu, er Márkus Þórðar s. átte.

<p><anchor id=a641.13>[II. 4. 1]. (langa tíma) hans (Egils) son var Þorsteinn, f. Hriflu, f. Egils, f. Skúla, <anchor id=a641.14>f. Þorðar, f. Boðvars, f. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus á Melum, ok ... Iarngerðar er herra <anchor id=a641.15>Erlendr Sterki átte; þeirra d. Valgerðr (M&ast; <hi lang=en-UK>citing</hi> &lsquo;Landnáma&rsquo; <hi lang=en-UK>in the margin; in</hi><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a641.16><hi>t, compiled out of</hi> M. <hi>and</hi> H., <hi>a slip of the lost leaf in</hi> H. <hi>then remaining</hi>).

<p><anchor id=a641.17>[II. 4. 14]. (Þorláks ens Auðga), f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu, er átte Snorri Markusson <anchor id=a641.18>á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a641.19>[II. 5. 4]. Steinn Þorfinnz s. var f. Arnoru, m. Hallbiargar, m. Oddnýjar, <anchor id=a641.20>m. Geirlaugar, m. Snælaugar, m. Márkus á Melum.<ab type=lineNum>20</ab>

<p><anchor id=a641.21>[II. 6. 4]. Hún (Hallveig) var m. Guðríðar, m. Biarnar, f. Steinunnar, m. Ketils, <anchor id=a641.22>f. Þorlaks, f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu er Snorri Markusson á.

<p><anchor id=a641.23>[II. 10. 5]. Snorra Goda, f. Halldórs, f. Snorra, f. Guðrunar, m. Hreins ábóta, <anchor id=a641.24>f. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er átte Markus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a641.25>[II. 15. 3]. (Illugi enn Svarte), f. Hermundar,  f. Hreins, f. Styrmis, f. Hreins<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a641.26>ábóta, f. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er Markus Þórðar s. átte.

<p><anchor id=a641.27>[II. 15. 4]. Þeirra d. var Guðríð, er átte Karlsefne: þeirra s. var Biorn, f. Steinunnar, <anchor id=a641.28>m. Ketils, f. Þorláks, f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu, er Snorri Markus s. átte.

<p><anchor id=a641.29>[II. 16. 1]. f. Hallz, f. Yngvilldar, m. Guðnyjar, m. Þorleiks, f. Þorleifs Beiskalda, <anchor id=a641.30>f. Alfeiðar, m. Þorláks, f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu er Snorre Markus s. átte.<ab type=lineNum>30</ab>

<p><anchor id=a641.31>[II. 17. 6]. Yri, m. Odda, f. Þorbiarnar, f. Þorgerðar, m. Odda, f. Þorgils, f. Halberu, <anchor id=a641.32>m. Hallz, f. Þuriðar, m. Hallberu, er átte Márkus Þorðar s.

<p><anchor id=a641.33>[II. 19. 1]. (Hnappraz), hans s. var Are er Reyknesingar eru frá komnir, f. Þorgils, <anchor id=a641.34>f. Ara, f. Hallberu, m. Þorgils, f. Hallberu, m. Hallz<note place=apparatus id=an641.6><ab type=lineNumRef>34.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Hallz]</ab> Haralldz, vell.</note>, f. Þuriðar, m. Hallberu <anchor id=a641.35>er Markus Þorðar s. átti.<ab type=lineNum>35</ab>

<p><anchor id=a641.36>[II. 21. 2]. (m. Coðraus), f. Herdísar, m. Alfeiðar, m. Þorlaks, f. Ketils prestz, <anchor id=a641.37>f. Helgu, er átte Snorri Markus s.

<p><anchor id=a641.38>[III. 2. 3]. Son Eiðar einn het Þórhallr, f. Eiðs, f. Þorhalldz, f. Oddnýjar, m. <anchor id=a641.39>Geirlaugar, m. Snælaugar, m. Markus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a641.40>[III. 5. 3]. Þorkell Krafla var f. Arnórs, f. Ragneiðar, m. Orms, f. Þorleiks,<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a641.41>f. Þorleifs Beiskialda, f. Alfeiðar, m. Þorláks, f. Ketils prestz<note place=apparatus id=an641.7><ab type=lineNumRef>41.</ab> Emend.; Þorláks prestz z Ketils, M&ast;.</note>, f. Helgu er Snorri átte, <anchor id=a641.42>Markus son.

<p><anchor id=a641.43>[III. 6. 3]. Halldóra het d. Húnrauðar, m. Vigdísar, m. Ulfheðins. f. Rafns, <anchor id=a641.44>f. Hallberu, m. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu er átti Markus Þórðar s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a641.45>[III. 6. 6]. (f. Eyiolfs) Halta, f. Þorsteins, f. Guðmundar gási, f. Eyjolfs, f. Guðlaugar,<ab type=lineNum>45</ab> <anchor id=a641.46>m. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu er átte Snorre Markus s. á Melum.


<p><anchor id=a641.47><hi>Repeated</hi> 7. 1.

<p><anchor id=a641.48>[III. 7. 4]. (f. Kolfinno), m. Hallberu, m. Hallz, f. Þuríðar, m. Hallberu er átte <anchor id=a641.49>Markus Þorðar s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a641.50>[III. 11. 2]. Son Arnors (Biarnar<note place=apparatus id=an641.8><ab type=lineNumRef>50.</ab> Biorns, M&ast;.</note> s., Þoðar s.), var Elldiarn, f. Hallz, f. Ragnhildar,<ab type=lineNum>50</ab> <anchor id=a641.51>m. Rafns, f. Hallberu, m. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er átti Markus, <anchor id=a641.52>Þórðar s. á Melum (<hi lang=en-UK>by the compiler inserted in a wrong place; it belongs to Arnorr <anchor id=a641.53>Kerlingarnef, and is repeated in its due place under Bard Sudreying</hi> (12. 3): &lsquo;þeirra <anchor id=a641.54>s. var Eldiarn,&rsquo; etc.).

<pb id=pb642 n=642><p><anchor id=a642.1>[III. 14. 4]. (Þorsteins Ranglatz), f. Ketils, f. Þorláks, f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu <anchor id=a642.2>er átte Snorri Markus s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.3>[III. 15. 6]. (Þórarinn), f. Falka, f. Þórarens, f. Sígríðar, m. Þórðar, f. Boðvars, <anchor id=a642.4>f. Þorðar, f. Markus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.5>[III. 15. 8]. Einarr Auðunnar s. átte Valgerðe Runolfs d.; þeirra son Eyjolfr, er<ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <anchor id=a642.6>átte Hallberu, Þóroddz<note place=apparatus id=an642.1><ab type=lineNumRef><corr sic="4.">6.</corr></ab> <ab type=textRef>Þóroddz]</ab> emend.; Þorolfs, M&ast;.</note> d. hialms, ok bioggo þau á Iórunnar-stoðum langa ævi, en <anchor id=a642.7>síðan á Moðru-vollum: Hallfríðr var d. Einars Eyjolfs s., m. Halldórs, f. Snorra, <anchor id=a642.8>f. Guðrúnar, m. Hreins ábóta, f. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu er átte Markus <anchor id=a642.9>Þórðar s.

<p><anchor id=a642.10>[III. 16. 2]. (Asolfs í Hofða), f. Odda, f. Gríms, f. Halldóru, m. Markus, f. Valgerðar,<ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <anchor id=a642.11>m. Boðvars, f. Þórðar, f. Markus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.12>[III. 16. 5]. (Finnboga ens Ramma), f. Narfa, f. Ingvilldar, m. Iodísar, m. Haullu, <anchor id=a642.13>m. Yngvildar, m. Þorgilsar, f. Geirnyjar, m. Valgerðar, m. Helgu er átte Snorri Markus <anchor id=a642.14>s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.15>[III. 19. 5]. (Hallberu), m. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er átte Markus<ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <anchor id=a642.16>Þórðar s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.17>[III. 22. 6]. (Laugarbrecku-Einarr), f. Hallveigar, m. Guðríðar, m. Biarnar, <anchor id=a642.18>f. Steinunnar, m. Ketils, f. Þorlaks, f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu, er átti Snorri Markus <anchor id=a642.19>s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.20>[IV. 1. 3]. (Þorsteinn enn Hvíti), hon var m. Þorgils, f. Helga, f. Biarna, f. Yngvilldar,<ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <anchor id=a642.21>m. Amunda, f. Guðrúnar, m. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz, f. <anchor id=a642.22>Márkus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.23>[IV. 2. 3]. Gunnhilldr var m. [Gríms, f.]<note place=apparatus id=an642.2><ab type=lineNumRef>23.</ab> <ab type=textRef>Gríms, f.]</ab> om. Cd.</note> Halldóru, m. Márkúss, f. Valgerðar, <anchor id=a642.24>m. Boðvars, f. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.25>[IV. 3. 2]. Hans (Lytings) s. var Geitir, f. Þorkels, f. Ragneiðar, m. Hollu,<ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <anchor id=a642.26>m. Bótolfs, f. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.27>[IV. 4. 2]. Ioreiðr var d. Þiðranda, m. Þorsteins, f. Guðríðar, m. Rannveigar, <anchor id=a642.28>m. Salgerðar, m. Guðrúnar, m. Hreins ábóta, f. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er <anchor id=a642.29>átte Markus Þorðar s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.30>[IV. 5. 3]. (dætr iii), Yngvildr var ein, hun var m. Þorsteins, f. Ámunda, f. Guðrúnar,<ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <anchor id=a642.31>m. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.32>[IV. 6. 3]. (Sveinbiarnar), f. Þorsteins, f. Botolfs, f. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. <anchor id=a642.33>Þórðar prestz, f. Márkus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.34>[IV. 12. 2]. (f. Goðrúnar), m. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus <anchor id=a642.35>á Melum.<ab type=lineNum>35</ab>

<p><anchor id=a642.36>[IV. 14. 5 n.]. (f. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.) ok f. Þórðar prestz, f. Márkus á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.37>[IV. 16. 1]. (Loðmundar ens Gamla), Þórðr het son Surtz or Kirkjubæ, f. Guðrúnar, <anchor id=a642.38>m. Þóru, m. Þorsteins holmunz, f. Gunnhildar, m. Iódísar, m. Vilborgar, <anchor id=a642.39>m. Magnús, f. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er átte Márkus Þórðar s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.40>[IV. 16. 3]. Hann (Eysteinn) var f. Þorkels, f. Þorsteins frá Keldu-Gnúpe, f. Þoríðar,<ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <anchor id=a642.41>m. Alofar, m. Guðrúnar, m. Þorvalldz, f. Ingiríðar, m. Ástríðar, m. Ingibiargar, <anchor id=a642.42>m. Þuríðar, m. Hallberu, er átte Markus Þórðar s. á Melum.

<p><anchor id=a642.43>[IV. 19. 1]. Þóra Steins d., m. Surtz<note place=apparatus id=an642.3><ab type=lineNumRef>43.</ab> <ab type=textRef>m. Surtz]</ab> emend.; systir M&ast;.</note>, var m. Þorsteins, f. Gunnhildar, m. Iódísar, <anchor id=a642.44>m. Vilborgar, m. Magnus, f. Snorra, f. Hallberu er átte Markus Þorðar s. á Melum.


<divGen type=apparatus rend="columns(3)">


<!-- END ICELANDIC TEXT -->



<pb id=pb643 n=643>
</body>
<back id=backmatter>
<div1 id=ix type=Index>
<head>INDEX.</head>


<div2 id=ixNames type=Section lang=is>
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>I.</ab> NAMES OF PERSONS.</head>

<p lang=en-UK>Names of settlers are printed in italics; Celtic settlers have a star before their name. The references are to book, ch., and paragraph (II. 5. 6 = Landnáma, Book II, ch. 5, paragr. 6), where possible; otherwise to page (and line). Gen. = Genealogies, pp. 237&ndash;52. Th. = the Thorsness Settlement, pp. 252&ndash;66. Mant. = Mantissa, pp. 266&ndash;77. Lib. = Libellus, pp. 287&ndash;306. Nj. = Njal, pp. 364&ndash;8. Cr. = Cristne Saga, pp. 376&ndash;406. Thorv. = Thorwald, pp. 407&ndash;12. Hv. = Hungrvaca, pp. 425&ndash;58. Þorl. = Þorláks Saga, pp. 458&ndash;502. Pol. = Póls Saga, pp. 502&ndash;34. Io. = Ioans Saga, pp. 535&ndash;67. Od. = Oddaverja-Þáttr, pp. 569&ndash;91. Gm. = Godmund, pp. 606&ndash;15. Ch. = Charters, pp. 630&ndash;8. Abbreviations: b. = brother. d. = daughter. f. = father. s. = son. m. = mother. w. = wife. For names not under K see C.


<divGen type=IndexToc>


<div3 id=ixA type=Letter>
<head>A</head>

<p lang=en-UK>Abraham, an Armenian (Greek?) bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

<p lang=en-UK>Absalon, archbishop of Lund, Pol. 3. 2; 7. 3; 14. 5; 15. 2.

<p lang=en-UK>Adalbert, archbishop of Bremen, Hv. 1. 3; 1. 5: Io. 1. 2. (See also Albertus.)

<p lang=en-UK>Adam (the first man), I. 3. 6.

<p lang=en-UK>Adrianus II, Pope in Rome, I. 1. 1.

<p>Aðisl at Uppsala, Lib. 306. 9.

<p>Agnar Ragnarsson Loðbrókar, Mant. 5. 1.

<p lang=en-UK>Agne, early king, Lib. 306. 7.

<p>Áláfr Cvaran, see Óleifr.

<p lang=en-UK>Albertus, bishop of Bremen, Mant. 3. 2: Cr. 3. 1. (See also Adalbert.)

<p>Aldís Conalsdótter en Barreyska, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1: Gen. B. 1.

<p>Aldís (al. Ásdís) Ófeigsdótter Grettis, V. 4. 5; 13. 2.

<p>Áleifr, see Óleifr.

<p lang=en-UK>Alexander, s. of Leo VI, Byzantine emperor, I. 1. 1.

<p lang=en-UK>Alexander III, Pope, Þorl. 8. 1.

<p lang=en-UK>Alexius, Byzantine emperor, Lib. 10. 12: Hv. 2. 16.

<p><hi>Alfarenn</hi> (al. <hi>Alfvarenn</hi>) <hi>Valason ens Sterka</hi>, II. 5. 9; 7. 1; 7. 3.

<p>Álfdís Gamladótter, III. 1. 2.

<p>Álfeiðr Rúnolfsdótter, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Álfeiðr, m. of Þórðr Freysgoðe, IV. 15. 3.

<p>Álfeiðr Þórleifsdótter, p. 641. 3, 30, &amp;c.

<p><hi>Álfgeirr of Álfgeirsvellir</hi>, III. 7. 5.

<p>Álfgeirr Suðreyingr, II. 7. 5.

<p>Álfgerðr Þórormsdótter, V. 13. 5.

<p><hi>Álfr enn Egðske Grímolfsson</hi>, V. 16. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Álfr í D&aolig;lom Eysteinsson Meinfrets, II. 5. 4; 15. 7; 15. 11; 19. 3; 21. 1: III. 1. 1: Gen. B. 11&ndash;12: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Álfr or Ostu, f. of Eysteinn Meinfretr, II. 15. 10: III. 1. 1.

<p>Álfr af Vors, II. 5. 6.

<p>Álftfirðingar, Th. 9. 3.

<p>Alfvarenn, see Alfarenn.

<p>Álof Árbót, d. of King Haraldr enn Hárfagre, IV. 14. 1.

<p>Álof Ásbiarnardótter, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Álof B&aolig;ðvarsdótter af Vors, V. 14. 5: Gen. A. 13&ndash;14: B. 6&ndash;7: Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

<p>Álof, w. of Earl Ásbi&aolig;rn Skerjablese, d. of Þórdr Vagg-agðe, V. 15. 1.

<p>Álof Bitro-Oddadótter, Gen. B. 11.

<p>Álof Elliða-ski&aolig;ldr Ófeigsdótter, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4.

<p>Álof Eyjolfsdótter, Od. 4. 2.

<p>Álof, m. of Finnr L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, V. 16. 10.

<p>Álof Goðmundardótter, II. 15. 96: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Álof Ingolfsdótter, II. 28. 5.

<p>Álof Ozurardótter, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Álof Ragnarsdótter Loðbrókar, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Álof Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Álof Þórgrímsdótter, II. 16. 2.

<pb id=pb644 n=644><p>Álof Þóríðardótter, p. 642. 40.

<p>Álof Þórsteinsdótter B&aolig;ðvarssonar, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Álof Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs. II. 14. 1; 14. 5.

<p>Alrekr, early king, Lib. 306. 7.

<p>Alrekr Hrappsson, IV. 1. 4.

<p>Alrekr Þórmóðarson, III. 12. 7.

<p>Ámunde Árnason, smith, Pol. 5. 2; 9<corr>.</corr> 2; 15. 3.

<p>Ámunde Goðmundarson, Ch. 635.

<p>Ámunde Þórgeirsson, II. 22. 6.

<p>Ámunde Þórsteinsson Síðo-Hallssonar, IV. 12. 2.

<p>Án Arnarson Hyrno, IV. 12. 1; 13. 1: (cf. Gen. B. 16).

<p>Án Bogsveiger, II. 22. 1: III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Án of Hraun, II. 8. 5.

<p>Án of Kirkiofell, II. 8. 5.

<p>Án enn Ramme, IV. 10. 1.

<p><hi>Án Rauðfeldr Grímsson Loðinkinna</hi>, II. 22. 2&ndash;4.

<p>Án Þóresson or Garðe, III. 20. 2.

<p>Anacletus II, Pope, Hv. 4. 11: Þorl. 1. 1.

<p>Áne of Ána-brecka, II. 4. 8.

<p>Áne Ávallzon, II. 13. 1.

<p>Are Biarnarson, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Are, follower of Egill Colsson, V. 7. 7.

<p>Are Eyjolfsson, Od. 4. 2.

<p>Are Loðmundarson, IV. 19. 3.

<p>Are Mársson á Reykjahólum, II. 2. 1; 6. 5; 11. 7; 15. 11; 19. 1&ndash;3: V. 4. 6: Gen. A. 38: B. 11&ndash;12, 14: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Are Súrsson, II. 22. 8.

<p>Are Þióðarsson, III. 11. 4.

<p>Are Þórgilsson enn Fróðe, II. 12. 6: V. 11. 6; 17. 1: Gen. A. 36: B. 14: Th. 7. 4: Lib. 306. 18: Cr. 9. 2; 10. 2; 10. 8: Pol. 14. 6: Io. 6. 1.

<p>Are Þórgilsson af Reykjanese, Gen. B. 10. 15: p. 641. 34.

<p>Are Þórgilsson enn Sterke, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Are (al. Án) Þórsteinsson Cleggia, IV. 9. 1.

<p>Are Þórvarzson, III. 15. 8: Pol. 6. 3.

<p>Arenbiorn herser or Fi&aolig;rðom, II. 2. 1: III. 13. 2.

<p>Arenbiorn herser Þóresson, II. 2. 1.

<p>Arna (?) Þórkelsdótter, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Arnalldr, bishop of Greenland, Mant. 6. 1.

<p>Arnalldr, b. of Sæmundr enn Suðreyske, III. 5. 12.

<p>Arnalldr Sæmundarson ens Suðreyska, III. 7. 1; 11. 2.

<p>Arnaldus, patriarch of Jerusalem, Lib. 10. 12: Cr. 10. 9. (See also Arnhallr.)

<p>Arnbi&aolig;rg Campa-Grímsdótter, II. 15. 13: III. 17. 3.

<p>Arnbi&aolig;rg of Arnbiargarlækr, II. 3. 5.

<p>Arnbi&aolig;rg H&aolig;fða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

<p>Arnbi&aolig;rg Ráðormsdótter, IV. 17. 4: V. 9. 8.

<p>Arnbi&aolig;rn Ásbrannzson or Breiðavík, II. 11. 6.

<p>Arnbi&aolig;rn (al. Árinbi&aolig;rn) Óleifsson Lang-hals, II. 3. 7: IV. 3. 1; 8. 2.

<p>Arnbi&aolig;rn  Slétto- <hi>or</hi> Sleito-Biarnarson, II. 15. 9: III. 9. 2; 11. 2.

<p><hi>Arndís en Auðga Steinolfsdótter</hi>, II. 18. 1; 30. 2: Gen. B. 9.

<p>Arndís Geirmundardótter Heljarskinns, Gen. B. 9. 11.

<p>Arndís Heðinsdótter, III. 9. 1.

<p>Arndís Styrbiarnardótter, III. 6. 6.

<p>Arndís Þórkelsdótter<corr sic=.>,</corr> III. 21. 2.

<p>Arne, master-smith, Hv. 5. 5.

<p>Arne Arnason, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Arne Arnmóðsson, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Arne Biarnarson, priest, Hv. 3. 12.

<p>Arne Magnússon, Ch. 635.

<p>Arne Torfuson, I. 7. 5.

<p>Arne Þórláksson, bishop of Skálholt, II. 22. 6: Ch. 637&ndash;8.

<p>Arneiðr Ásbiarnardótter Skerja-Blesa, IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1.

<p>Arnfríðr Slétto-Biarnardótter, III. 9. 2.

<p>Arngeirr enn Austræne, III. 18. 1.

<p>Arngeirr Bersason, II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

<p>Arngeirr Hvasse Þórmóðarson, III. 12. 7.

<p><hi>Arngeirr á Slétto</hi>, III. 22. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Arngeirr Spak-B&aolig;ðvarsson, Cr. 2. 3.

<p>Arngerðr Ásbrannzdótter, V. 13. 6.

<p>Arngerðr Skíðadótter, III. 12. 7.

<p>Arngerðr Þórbiarnardótter, II. 18. 2; 28. 1.

<p>Arngerðr Þórkelsdótter, I. 6. 6.

<p>Arngrímr Goðmundarson, I. 7. 5.

<p>Arngrímr Goðe Helgason, II. 3. 2.

<p>Arngrímr Sæbiarnarson Goða, V. 4. 7.

<p>Arngrímr Þórsteinsson, V. 11. 3.

<p>Arngunnr Hámundardótter, IV. 7. 2, 15. 1: Gen. A. 5.

<p>Arngunnr Þórsteinsdótter Dranga-karls, V. 7. 2.

<p>Arnhallr (= Arnaldus), patriarch of Jerusalem, Hv. 2. 16.

<p>Arni, see Arne.

<p>Arnis ábóte Biarnarson Enska, II. 22. 6.

<pb id=pb645 n=645>

<p>Arnkatla, w. of Helge Eyþjófsson, II. 22. 3.

<p>Arnkatla Þórðardótter, II. 15. 8.

<p>Arnkatla Þórsteinsdótter, IV. 19. 3.

<p>Arnkell Goðe Þórólfsson Bægifótz, II. 7. 6; II. 5&ndash;6; Th. 8. 3.

<p>Arnlaugr í Arnlaugsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

<p>&ast;Arnleif, sister of Svart-cell, I. 6. 5.

<p>Arnleif H&aolig;fða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

<p>Arnleif Illogadótter Ramma, II. 11. 7.

<p>Arnleif Þórðardótter Gellis, II. 11. 7.

<p>Arnliótr Þóroddzson Hialms, III. 14. 19.

<p>Arnmóðr, ancestor of the Arnm&oeacute;ðlingar, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Arnmóðr enn Gamle Þórgrímsson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Arnmóðr Heðinsson, III. 3. 1.

<p>Arnmóðr iarl Nereiðsson, V. 16. 4.

<p><hi>Arnmódr enn Rauðe Þórbiarnarson</hi>, II. 20. 9; 21. 3.

<p>Arnmóðr enn Skiálge Þórkellsson, III. 7. 4.

<p>Arnoddr Óláfsson Becks, III. 12. 6.

<p>Arnoddr Slétto-Biarnarson, III. 9. 2.

<p>Arnóra Gunnbiarnardótter, II. 15. 7.

<p>Arnóra Laugarbrecko-Einarsdótter, II. 6. 5; 15. 4 (erroneously called Lón-Einarsdótter).

<p>Arnóra Steinsdótter, p. 641. 19.

<p>Arnóra Þórðardótter Gellis, II. 17. 8.

<p>Arnóra Þórgeirsdótter ens Óða, III. 12. 4.

<p>Arnórr Arndísarson, Thorv. 5.

<p>Arnórr, f. of Ásbi&aolig;rn, II. 6. 5: Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Arnórr, s. of Birna, II. 21. 1.

<p>Arnórr enn Góðe Steinolfsson Rauðæingr, III. 14. 4.

<p>Arnórr Herlaugsson, V. 16. 9.

<p>Arnórr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Arnórr Hýnefr Þóroddzson, III. 1. 2.

<p>Arnórr Kerlingar-nef Biarnarson, III. 11. 2; 12. 3: Cr. 1. 2; p. 414.

<p>Arnórr Nafar-Helgason, III. 12. 2.

<p>Arnórr Ornolfsson, IV. 18. 6.

<p>Arnórr Skefilsson í G&aolig;ngo-Skarðe, III. 12. 2.

<p>Arnórr Þóresson, III. 15. 10.

<p>Arnórr Þórgrímsson, III. 21. 1.

<p>Arnórr Þórkelsson kr&aolig;flo, p. 641. 40.

<p>Arnríðr Heðinsdótter, III. 18. 1.

<p>Arnsteinn in Axefirth, p. 320.

<p>Arnsteinn Goðe Ketilsson, III. 22. 2.

<p>Arnþiófr í Cryso-vík, V. 16. 10.

<p>Arnþóra Þórsteinsdótter Tialdstæðings, V. 8. 6.

<p>Arnþórr the Eastman, Od. 6. 5.

<p>Arnþrúðr Arenbiarnardótter, II. 2. 1.

<p>Ása Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs, see Æsa.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rg (al. Ásborg) Oddzdótter, V. 7. 9.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn, f. of Álof, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Arnórsson, II. 6. 5: Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn enn Auðge Harðarson, II. 2. 4; 15. 3: III. 2. 3.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Auðunnarson, II. 8. 5.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Detti-áss Eyvindarson, III. 16. 5.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Heyangrs-Biarnarson, IV. 15. 1; 15. 3: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 25.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Hrafnkelsson, IV. 6. 3.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Ketilsson ens Fiflska, II. 21. 1: IV. 16. 1 (= Gen. A. 23, Ásbi&aolig;rn Þórsteinsson Ketilssonar?).

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Loðinh&aolig;fðe, IV. 5. 4: Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Myrkárskalle Hrossbiarnarson, Gen. A. 33.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Ófeigsson Grettis, V. 4. 5.

<p><hi>Asbi&aolig;rn Ozararson</hi>, V. 16. 12.

<p><hi>Asbi&aolig;rn Reyrketilsson</hi>, V. 3. 6.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn iarl Skeria-Blese, IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Vodve Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Þórarensson, IV. 5. 4.

<p>Ásbi&aolig;rn Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 23: Cr. 4. 3.

<p>Ásbirningar, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Ásborg, see Ásbi&aolig;rg.

<p>Ásbrandr at Kambe í Breiðavík, II. 7. 2; 11. 6.

<p>Ásbrandr Narfason, III. 12. 10&ndash;11.

<p>Ásbrandr, f. of Þórbrandr, Gen. A. 11.

<p>Ásbrandr Þórbrannzson Harallzsonar Hrings, III. 3. 1.

<p><hi>Ásbrandr Þórbrandzson Þórbiarnarsonar ens Óarga</hi>, V. 13. 6.

<p>Ásdís Bárðardótter, II. 7. 2.

<p>Ásdís Knattardótter, I. 7. 2.

<p>Ásdís Ófeigsdótter, see Aldís.

<p>Ásdís Þórgrímsdótter (al. Þórmóðsdótter), II. 23. 2; 24. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Áse herser Ingiallzson, II. 5. 1: V. 11. 4.

<p>Áse herser, f. of Veðrar-Grímr, II. 14. 3.

<p>Ásgautr Ásmundarson, V. 9. 10: Cr. 8. 2.

<p>Ásgeirr Auðunnarson Ásgeirssonar, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

<p>Ásgeirr Austmanna-skelmer, V. 12. 2.

<p>Ásgeirr Ceartansson, II. 5. 9.

<p><hi>Ásgeirr Cneif Oleifsson</hi>, V. 3. 2&ndash;3: Io. 1. 1.

<p>Ásgeirr Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

<p>Ásgeirr Gizorarson, Hv. 2. 19.

<p>Ásgeirr Grímsson, V. 12. 4.

<p>Ásgeirr of Hamar, II. 3. 4.

<p>Ásgeirr Knattarson í Vatz-firðe, II. 15. <pb id=pb646 n=646>9 <hi>b</hi>; 18. 2: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 2: Cr. 1. 2.

<p><corr sic=Asgeirr>Ásgeirr</corr> Rauðfeldr Herjolfsson, III. 14. 6; 14. 10&ndash;11.

<p>Ásgeirr, the slayer of Sámr Barkarson, II. 10. 5.

<p>Ásgeirr Ulfsson, V. 14. 7: Gen. A. 14.

<p>Ásgeirr Vestarsson of Eyre, II. 8. 1; 9. 4; 10. 4: Th. 7. 2&ndash;3; 9. 3.

<p>Ásgeirr Æðe-collr Auðunnarson (al. Onundarson Tréfótar), II. 15. 9; 15. 14; 29. 1: III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5.

<p><hi>Ásgerðr Asksdótter ens Ómálga</hi>, I. 10. 7: V. 3. 3&ndash;5: Gen. A. 8&ndash;9; 11.

<p>Ásgerðr Biarnardótter, II. 4. 1.

<p>Ásgerðr H&aolig;fða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

<p>Ásgerðr Ketilsdótter ens Áuðga, V. 3. 6.

<p>Ásgerðr Oddzdótter Mióva, V. 9. 4.

<p>Ásgrímr Elliða-Grímsson, III. 15. 5: V. 7. 8: Gen. A. 13: Cr. 1. 2; 8. 3: p. 312.

<p><hi><corr sic="Âsgrímr">Ásgrímr</corr> Ondóttzson Kráko</hi>, III. 15. 2&ndash;5: Gen. A. 13.

<p>Ásgrímr Ulfsson, V. 8. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Ásgrímr Þórhallzson, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Áshildr, w. of Óláfr Tvennumbrúne, V. 12. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Áskell, archbishop of Lund, Hv. 4. 9; 5. 3; 5. 12.

<p>Áskell Goðe Eyvindarson (al. Ketilsson H&aolig;rðska), III. 19. 1; 19. 4: V. 17. 4.

<p>&ast;<hi>Áskell Hnocan Dufþaksson</hi> (al. Dofnials son), IV. 17. 5: V. 9. 10 (Ásgeirr).

<p>Áskell Olmóðsson ens Gamla, Gen. B. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Áskell Ormsson ens Auðga, V. 9. 5.

<p>Áskell Ósvífsson, Cr. 3. 6.

<p>Áskell Tiorfe (al. Torfe), III. 17. 4.

<p>Áskell Þóresson, III. 17. 2.

<p>Áskr enn Ómálge, V. 3. 3&ndash;4: Gen. A. 8 (Áse, Ar).

<p>Áslákr Aurgoðe Hrafnsson, IV. 17. 5; 18. 3; 18. 4.

<p>Áslákr Bifra-Káre Ánarson, IV. 13. 1: Gen. B. 16 (Arnarson).

<p>Áslákr Fitja-skalle Áskelsson, Gen. B. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Áslákr Þórbergsson (al. Hróarsson) of Langadale, II. 6. 4; 11. 7; 12. 2; 13. 1: Th. 9. 3.

<p>Áslaug Sigurðardótter Fáfnesbana, Gen. B. 12: Mant. 5. 1.

<p><corr sic=Aslaug>Áslaug</corr> Sigurðardótter Orms-í-Auga, Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Ásleif Þórgilsdótter, V. 9. 3; 9. 6.

<p>Ásleikr Biarnarson Iárnsíðo, III. 11. 1.

<p>Ásmundr Áskelsson Hnocans, V. 9. 10.

<p><hi>Ásmundr Atlason</hi>, II. 5. 9&ndash;10.

<p><hi>Ásmundr under Gnúpe</hi>, III. 5. 2; 5. 6.

<p>Ásmundr Hæro-langr Þórgrímsson, II. 29. 1: III. 20. 2: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Ásmundr, f. of Már, II. 21. 1.

<p><hi>Ásmundr Ondóttzson Kráko</hi>, III. 15. 2&ndash;5; 20. 1.

<p>Ásmundr Ozurarson, IV. 3. 8.

<p>Ásmundr Skegglauss Ófeigsson, V. 4. 5.

<p>Ásmundr Sveinbiarnarson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Ásmundr Þórfinnsson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Ásmundr, s. of Þórgerðr Þórbiarnardótter, II. 4. 13.

<p>Ásmundr Þórgestzson, II. 11. 8.

<p>Ásný Flosadótter, V. 9. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Ásný Vestarsdótter, V. 4. 5; 4. 7.

<p>Ásný Víga-Sturlodótter, II. 20. 2; 23. 2.

<p>&ast;<hi>Ásolfr Alscic Conalsson</hi>, I. 7. 3&ndash;6.

<p>Ásolfr Flose Vemundarson í H&aolig;fða, II. 15. 11: III. 16. 2 (Verm-); 17. 3: IV. 2. 3.

<p>Ásolfr, f. of Goðrún, II. 21. 1.

<p>Ásta Goðbrannzdótter Kúlo, m. of St. Óláfr, II. 29. 1: III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Ástríðr Eiríksdótter, m. of King Óláfr Tryggvason, Gen. B. 5&ndash;6: Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

<p>Ástríðr Hrolfsdótter hersess, II. 9. 4; 7. 3.

<p>Ástríðr Hrútzdótter, II. 15. 10.

<p>Ástríðr Ingiríðardótter, p. 642. 40.

<p>Ástríðr Mannvitz-brecka Móðolfsdótter, IV. 7. 3; 15. 6.

<p>Ástríðr Sl&oelig;ki-drengr Bragadótter, II. 2. 1.

<p>Ástríðr Sveinsdótter, m. of King Svein of Denmark, Io. 2. 1; 2. 2.

<p>Ástríðr Vígfússdótter, m. of Eirekr á Ofro-st&aolig;ðom ( = next?), Gen. B. 6.

<p>Ástríðr Vígfússdótter af Vors, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Ástríðr Þórgeirsdótter, III. 3. 1.

<p>Ástríðr Þórvallzdótter Holbarka, IV. 5. 4.

<p>Ásvalldr, see Ósvaldr.

<p>Ásvalldr Ulfsson, II. 12. 1; 28. 3.

<p>Ásv&aolig;r Brynjolfsdótter, IV. 4. 3.

<p>Ásv&aolig;r Herjolfsdótter, IV. 5. 4.

<p>Ásv&aolig;r Oddbiarnardótter, V. 4. 3.

<p>Ásv&aolig;r Ófeigsdótter, V. 4. 5.

<p>Ásv&aolig;r <corr sic="Þóresdotter">Þóresdótter</corr>, IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28.

<p>Atle or Atleyjo, II. 5. 5.

<p>Atle Ásmundarson Atlasonar, II. 5. 10.

<p>Atle Ásmundarson Hæro-langs, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Atle, a freedman of Geirmundr Heljarskinn, II. 17. 6; 25. 1.

<pb id=pb647 n=647>

<p>Atle Hásteinsson, V. 11. 2; 12. 2.

<p>Atle H&aolig;gnason, II. 22. 5.

<p>Atle H&aolig;scullzson, II. 22. 5.

<p>Atle Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Atle Illingr, III. 14. 6.

<p>Atle iarl enn Mióve, I. 3. 2: V. 11. 1&ndash;2; 17. 2: Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Atle prestr, Pol. 5. 2.

<p>Atle enn Ramme Eilífsson, III. 6. 6; 11. 2: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 1. 1: Thorv. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Atle enn Rauðe Ulfsson, II. 12. 1; 19. 1; 19. 5; 20. 2: Gen. A. 38.

<p>Atle Skíðason ens Gamla, III,  6. 6; 7. 4.

<p>Atle Tannason, II. 18. 1.

<p><hi>Atle Valason</hi>, II. 5. 9.

<p>Atle Þórðarson, II. 11. 5.

<p>Auðolfr á Auðolfs-st&aolig;ðom, III. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p><hi>Auðolfr at Bægisá</hi>, III. 14. 19.

<p><hi>Auðr en Diupauðga Ketilsdotter</hi>, I. 4. 5: II. 14. 1&ndash;15. 7; 15. 11&ndash;15: V. 17. 2; 17. 5: Gen. A. 35 (Uðr en Diúpúðga): Th. I. 1; 1. 4; 5. 2; 6. 3: Lib. 2. 1; 305. 15.

<p>Auðr Eyvindardótter, IV. 18. 2: Gen. A. 4; 10 (Unnr), 25 (Uðr).

<p>Auðr Ívarsdótter Víðfaðma, Gen. A. 1.

<p>Auðr Óláfsdótter Iafna-collz, II. 22. 5.

<p>Auðr Vésteinsdótter, w. of Gisle Súrsson, II. 22. 3; 22. 7&ndash;8.

<p>Auðr, w. of Þórarenn Svarte of Mávahlíð, II. 7. 6.

<p>Auðr Rauðsson, I. 10. 5.

<p>Auðunn Ásgeirsson á Ásgeirs-á, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

<p>Auðunn Ásgeirsson Auðunnarsonar, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

<p>Auðunn Geit, earl, III. 15. 2.

<p>Auðunn Ketilsson Einhenda, V. 9. 3; 9. 6.

<p>Auðunn enn Rauðe, IV. 14. 6.

<p>Auðunn Rotinn Þórólfsson Smiors, III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 32.

<p><hi>Auðunn Sk&aolig;koll Biarnarson</hi>, III. 4. 1<corr>;</corr> 5. 15: V. 17. 2: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5; Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Auðunn Smiðkelsson, I. 10. 2: II. 2. 2.

<p><hi>Auðunn Stode</hi> (or <hi>Stote</hi>) <hi>Valason</hi>, II. 5. 9; 8. 1; 8. 3&ndash;5.

<p>Auðunn Þórðarson, I. 7. 1.

<p>Auðunn Þunn-carr, V. 9. 3.

<p>Augurr í Camba-kisto Hroðgeirsson, V. 11. 5.

<p>Aun enn Gamle, Lib. 306. 8.

<p>Ávallde Ingiallzson, see Skegg-Ávallde.

<p>Ávalldr Ongt-í-brióste, II. 13. 1.

<p>&ast;<hi>Avangr</hi>, an Irish settler, I. 7. 1.

<p>Axlhegingar, III. 8. 4.




<div3 id=ixB>
<head>B</head>


<p>Baldvini, King of Jerusalem, Lib. 10. 2: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 2. 16.

<p><hi>Balke Blængsson</hi>, I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3; 30. 1: III. 1. 1; 20. 5.

<p>Ballæringar, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Barðe Guðmundarson, see Víga-Barðe.

<p>Bárðr í Ál Ketilsson, III. 6. 6: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 1. 1.

<p>Bárðr Atlason enn Svarte (al. H&aolig;scollzson), II. 20. 8; 22. 5.

<p>Bárðr Báreksson, V. 3. 7.

<p>Bárðr Bláskeggr, see B&aolig;rkr Blátannar-skegg.

<p>Bárðr Bl&aolig;ndo-horn, V. 3. 3.

<p>Bárðr, s. of Cecilia, II. 22. 6.

<p>Bárðr Collason, II. 7. 2.

<p>Bárðr Herjolfsson, II. 12. 7: V. 16. 11.

<p>Bárðr H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

<p>Bárðr H&aolig;scullzson, II. 15. 8: Gen. A. 35.

<p>Bárðr I&aolig;kulsson, III. 5. 13.

<p>Bárðr Ormsson, V. 15. 2.

<p><hi>Bárðr Suðreyingr</hi>, III. 12. 3.

<p>Bárðr Þórgeirsson at Mosfelle, V. 14. 7.

<p>Bárðr Þórleifsson, I. 7. 5.

<p>Barðverjar, III. 12. 4.

<p>Bárekr, f. of Bárðr, V. 3. 7.

<p>Bárekr Sighvatzson, V. 5. 2.

<p>Barna-Þóroddr Ormsson, III. 14. 12.

<p>&ast;<hi>Baugr Rauðsson</hi>, V. 4. 4; 7. 1&ndash;2: Gen. 5.

<p>Baugssyner, V. 7. 1&ndash;2 (see Gunnarr, Eyvindr, Sniall-Steinn).

<p>Beadmacr (al. Maddaðr) King of the Irish, II. 8. 5.

<p>&ast;<hi>Becan á Becans-st&aolig;ðom</hi>, I. 7. 9.

<p>Beda the venerable. Prolog.

<p>Beinir Hialtason, II. 15. 7.

<p>Beinir Mósson (Mársson), II. 6. 2: V. 13. 4.

<p>Beinir Sigurðarson, Hv. 5. 13.

<p>Benedikt, b. of King Knut, Hv. 2. 20.

<p>Beolan, Scottish King, II. 9. 3.

<p>Bera Egilsdótter Skalla-Grímssonar, V. 16. 6: Cr 1. 5.

<p>Bera Iátmundardótter ens Helga, Gen. A. 32.

<p>Bera Ormsdótter, Cr. 1. 5.

<p>Bera Yngvarsdótter, II. 4. 12.

<p>Berðlo-Káre Vemundarson, I. 8. 1: IV. 3. 6.

<p>Berfirðingar, IV. 11. 6.

<p>Bergdís Geirsdótter, I. 9. 6.

<p>Bergdís, wife of Grímr Ingiallzson, II. 5. 1.

<p>Bergliót Þóresdótter, m. of Hákon iarl enn Ríke, IV. 14. 1.

<pb id=pb648 n=648>

<p>Bergr Gliro-Hallason, III. 22. 1.

<p>Bergr Gunnsteinsson, Gm. 612.

<p>Bergr Vésteinsson, II. 23. 1.

<p>Bergr Vígfússon, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Bergr Þórmóðarson, II. 11. 7.

<p>Bergþóra Colgrímsdótter, I. 7. 7.

<p>Bergþóra Hrútzdótter, II. 15. 10.

<p>Bergþóra Óleifsdótter Pá, II. 15. 9 <hi>b</hi>: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Bergþóra Skarpheðinsdótter, Gen. A. 8: Nj. 367.

<p>Bergþórr Buckr Sveinsson, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Bergþórr Brynjolfsson, V. 9. 3.

<p>Bergþórr Collzson, I. 6. 5; 11. 2.

<p>Bergþórr Hrafnsson, L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, Lib<corr sic="-">.</corr> 10. 8&ndash;10: Cr. 10. 7: Hv. 3. 13.

<p>Bergþórr Þórláksson, II. 8. 1.

<p>Berse, s. of Dagrún, V. 6. 3.

<p>Berse Dalcsson, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Berse Goðlauss Balkason, II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

<p>Berse Halldórsson, f. of Þórmóðr Colbrúnarskáld, II. 26. 1.

<p>Berse Halldórsson, priest, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Berse Ozorarson, IV<corr>.</corr> 5. 2.

<p>Berse (= Brese) Þórmóðarson, I. 7. 2; 10. 1; 11. 1.

<p>Biaðuch Cearvalsson, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Bialfe (al. Bialke) a freedman of Ásgerðr Asksdótter, Gen. A. 11.

<p>Biargey Valbrannzdótter, II. 24. 8; 26. 1.

<p>Biarnarðr, see Biarnharðr.

<p>Biarne Bergþórsson, p. 593.

<p>Biarne Biarnason, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Biarne Brodd-Helgason, III. 8. 1: IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 26; 28.

<p>Biarne Flosason, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Biarne Hallkelsson, V. 15. 2.

<p>Biarne Húslangr Skegg-Broddason, IV. 3. 1: Mant. 4. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Biarne Kolbeinsson, bishop of Orkney, Pol. 13. 1.

<p>Biarne enn Spake Þórsteinsson, V. 7. 9; 13. 2: Lib. 10. 2.

<p>Biarne Sturloson, II. 1. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Biarne Þórbrannzson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Biarneyja-Ketill, III. 22. 2.

<p>Biarnharðr enn Bókvíse Vilráðsson, foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1&ndash;2: Lib. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Biarnharðr enn Saxneske, foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1&ndash;2: Lib. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Biarnheðinn prestr Sigurðarson, in <sic>Kirk&shy;jobæ</sic>, I. 7. 11: Hv. 5. 13: Þorl. 5. 1; 6. 1&ndash;2: Ch. 631.

<p>Biartmar iarl: II. 22. 2.

<p>Biartmar Ánarson, II. 22. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Biolan Vilbaldsson, IV. 17. 5.

<p><hi>Biólfr</hi>, sworn brother of Loðmundr Gamle, IV. 9. 2; 10. 1.

<p>Biolloc Vilbaldsdótter, IV. 17. 5.

<p>Bi&aolig;rg Eyvindardótter Austmannz, II. 19. 1.

<p>Bi&aolig;rg Ísolfsdótter, IV. 18. 3.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn, abbot of Thverá, Þorl. 15. 2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn enn Auðge Geirleifsson, III. 14. 14.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Austmaðr, II. 7. 5.

<p><hi>Bi&aolig;rn enn Austræne Ketilsson</hi>, I. 4. 5: II. 9. 1&ndash;3; 14. 6; 16. 1; 17. 6: V. 17. 2: Gen. B. 3; 10: Th. 1. 1; 2. 1&ndash;3; 3. 2; 5. 1&ndash;2; 6. 1&ndash;3; 7. 3; 9. 2.

<p><hi>Bi&aolig;rn í Biarnarfirðe</hi>, II. 20. 7; 29. 2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Blá-t&aolig;nn, IV. 13. 3.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn B&aolig;lverksson Blindinga-trióno, II. 11. 4: Th. 8. 2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Buckr, Mant. 5. 4.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Buna Veðrar-Grímsson, I. 4. 1: II. 14. 1: IV. 15. 1: V. 10. 4: Gen. A. 13&ndash;14; 25; 32; 35; B. 3; 7: Th. I. 1. 1: Mant. 5. 5: Thorv. 7.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Byrðo-smi&aolig;r Hroallzson, III. 11. 1: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Cearleifsson, Hv. 3. 12.

<p><hi>Bi&aolig;rn of Dalsminne</hi>, see <hi>Rauða-Bi&aolig;rn</hi>.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Eiríksson, king of Sweden, I. 1. 1.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn enn Enske, II. 22. 6.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn, a thrall of Geirmundr Heljar-skinn, II. 17. 6.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Gilsson, bishop of Hólar, Hv. 4. 9; 5. 1, &amp;c.: Þorl. 4. 1: Io. 3. 3; 12. 5: p. 594.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

<p><hi>Bi&aolig;rn Goll-beri</hi>, I. 6. 4; 6. 6; 9. 1: II. 5. 7: V. 17. 2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn enn Hage Þórvallzson, Hv. 5. 5.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Harallzson ens Hárfagra, Lib. 8. 4.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn at Hauge (Eiríksson Eymundarsonar?), III. 12. 1; 12. 7.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn enn Háve, IV. 11. 6.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Helgason, II. 5. 11.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Hiallcarsson, II. 22. 4.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Hitd&oelig;la-kappe Arngeirsson, II. 4. 3; 4. 11; 30. 1.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Hrólfsson, III. 13. 1&ndash;3; 15. 1: V. 12. 5.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Hunda-Steinarsson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Hvalmage Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn enn Hvíte Caðalsson, Gen. A. 11.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Iárnsíða Ragnarsson Loðbrókar, III. 11. 1: Gen. A. 32: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn, Iórsala-, Ch. 636.

<pb id=pb649 n=649>

<p>Bi&aolig;m Liótólfsson, II. 16. 2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Mársson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Ófeigsson Þunnskeggs, III. 8. 3.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Óttarsson, II. 9. 3: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn prestr, chaplain to Bishop Paul, Pol. 10. 1;  11. 2 ; 12. 2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Reyðarsíða, IV. 8. 2.

<p><hi>Bi&aolig;rn at Reyne</hi> (<hi>Reyne-Bi&aolig;rn</hi>), IV. 18. 8.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Steinolfsson, III. 12. 6.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn enn Sterke Ceallacsson, II. 9. 1; 16. 1: Th. 1. 1.

<p><hi>Bi&aolig;rn Sviðin-horne</hi>, IV. 11. 7.

<p><hi>Bi&aolig;rn í Svínhaga</hi>, V. 7. 5&ndash;6;  8. 4.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Sæmundarson, Ch. 637.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Þórðarson, p. 641, 50.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Þórfinnsson Carls-emnes ok Goðríðar, II. 15.4: p. 641. 27.

<p>Bi&aolig;rn Þórvallzson, III. 14. 12.

<p>Bi&aolig;rnolfr Grímsson Lodinkinna, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Bi&aolig;rnolfr Hrómundarson, I. 3. 1.

<p>Birna Illogadótter, II. 21. 1.

<p>Birningr Gnúpsson, I. 6. 6.

<p>Bitro-Odde Þórvallzson Orgoða, II. 29. 3: Gen. B. 11 (Þórbiarnarson).

<p>Blígr, see Þórðr Blígr.

<p>Blót-Már at Móberge, III. 12. 2.

<p><hi>Blund-Cetill</hi> = <hi>Cetill Blundr</hi>.

<p>Blund-Cetill Geirsson I. 9. 6.

<p>Blæingr Sótason, II. 4. 3; 30. 1: III. 20. 5.

<p><hi>B&aolig;ðmóðr í B&aolig;ðmóðs-tungo</hi>, IV. 16. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðmóðr or Bulka-rúme, II. 4. 14.

<p>B&aolig;ðmóðr Gerpir Grímolfsson, II. 28. 5: III. 14. 10; 20. 1 (Grímsson?).

<p>B&aolig;ðmódr or Skut, II. 20. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðmóðr Þóresson Haustmyrkrs, V. 16. 7.

<p><hi>B&aolig;ðolfr or Hvine Gríms</hi> (al. <hi>Orms</hi>) <hi>son</hi>, III. 15. 3; 20. 1&ndash;3.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Arnórsson, III. 21. 1.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Biarke, III. 2. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Bl&aolig;ðro-skalle, I. 6. 2: II. 21. 5.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr or B&aolig;ðvars-hólom, III. 1. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr at B[a]oðvars-toftom, V. 12. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Gizorarson, Hv. 2. 13; 2. 19.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10; 21. 1.

<p><hi>B&aolig;ðvarr enn Hvíte Þórleifsson</hi>, IV. 11. 8; 12. 1&ndash;2: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19: Lib. 7. 1.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr, a thrall of Ingimundr enn Gamle, III. 5. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Snæþrima Þórleifsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr S&oelig;lgason, see Svína-B&aolig;ðvarr.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Vígsterksson, II. 20. 3; 27. 1.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Víkinga-Kárason, of Vors, V. 14. 5: Gen. A. 13&ndash;14: B. 6&ndash;7: Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Þórðarson B&aolig;ðvarssonar, Od. 4. 1: p. 640. 50 (B. í Bæ).

<p>B&aolig;ðvarr Þórðarson Skúlasonar, IV. 14. 4 <hi>n</hi>: Od. 3. 2 (B. í Görðum): Ch. 635: p. 640. 49.

<p>Boge, b. of Hialmgerðr, III. 14. 10.

<p>Bolle Bollason, II. 9. 3; 15. 8; 21. 2: Gen. B. 13&ndash;14.

<p>Bolle Skeggjason í Skógom, I. 7. 8: V. 2. 2.

<p>Bolle Þórleiksson, II. 15. 8&ndash;9;  20. 6: III. 11. 2: Gen. A. 35: B. 13: Cr. 6. 3&ndash;4.

<p>B&aolig;lverkr Blindinga-trióna, II. 11. 4: V. 9. 8: Th. 8. 2.

<p>B&aolig;lverkr Eyjolfsson ens Grá, II. 15. 14; 21. 1: Gen. A. 37.

<p>B&aolig;rkr Blátannar-skegg Þórkelsson, V. 6. 3; 7. 8: Gen. A. 4.

<p>B&aolig;rkr Digre Þórsteinsson, II. 7. 5; 10. 5; 15. 14; 17. 4; 22. 8: Th. 11. 2.

<p>B&aolig;rkr Grímsson, p. 640. 7, 17, 24.

<p>B&aolig;rkr Starkaðarson, Gen. A. 4.

<p>B&aolig;rkr Þórmóðarson, I. 7. 1: II. 17. 6; 20. 6: Gen. B. 8.

<p>Bót, a bond-woman of Ketilbi&aolig;rn&apos;s, V. 14. 4.

<p>Bótolfr, bishop of Hólar, Cr. 2. 3.

<p>Bótolfr, ship-captain, Gm. 614, 615.

<p>Bótolfr Sveinbiarnarson (or Þórsteinsson Sveinbiarnarsonar), III. 11. 2: IV. 17. 4.

<p>Brage, the Poet, II. 2. 1; 17. 2: Mant. 274, 276&ndash;7.

<p>Brandax (Brandr ?), f. of Steinn, IV. 9. 5.

<p>Brande frá Gnúpom Eyvindarson Karpa, IV. 7. 3 (Brandr): 18. 1&ndash;2.

<p><hi>Brand-Onundr</hi>, IV. 12. 1; 12. 3.

<p>Brandr Áskelsson, V. 9. 5.

<p>Brandr Dalcsson, Pol. 11. 2: Gm. 612.

<p>Brandr Eyjolfsson, V. 2. 2.

<p>Brandr enn Fróðe Halldórsson, prior, II. 13. 1.

<p>Brandr Gíslason, II. 23. 2: Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 4. 10.

<p>Brandr Gliro-Hallason, III. 22. 1.

<p>Brandr frá Gnúpom, see Brande.

<p>Brandr enn Orve Vermundarson, II. 7. 8: Gen. B. 13: p. 595.

<p>Brandr Skegg-Ávaldason, III. 5. 16.

<p>Brandr Sæmundarson, bishop of Hólar, I. 7. 8: II. 15. 4: III. 20. 2: IV. 18. 7:  V. 7. 6; 10. 4:  Hv. 5. 9: Þorl. 12. 4: Pol. 2. 1: 4. 1; 6. 2&ndash;3; 7. 3; 11. 2; 15. 2: Io. 14. 5: Gm. 606.

<pb id=pb650 n=650><p>Brandr enn Víðf&aolig;rle, Cr. 9. 1.

<p>Brandr, f. of Þórarenn, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Brandr Þórarensson, Gen. B. 14: Ch. 632, 633.

<p>Brandr Þórbiarnarson, V. 2. 2: Gen. B. 14.

<p>Brandr Þóresson Halldórssonar, II. 13. 1.

<p>Brandr Þóresson á Þingvelle, V. 16. 2.

<p>Brandr Þórgrímsson, I. 7. 5: II. 10. 4.

<p>Brandr Þórhaddzson, II. 23. 2.

<p>Brandr Þórkelsson, Lib. 306. 18.

<p>Brandr Þórmóðarson, V. 16. 2.

<p>Brandr Þóroddzson, IV. 3. 7.

<p>Brattr í Brattz-holte, V. 11. 2.

<p>Braut-Onundr, Lib. 306. 10.

<p>Breiðd&oeacute;ler, IV. 11. 4.

<p>Breiðfirðingar, Lib. 2. 1.

<p>Breiðr Sigmundarson, II. 6. 4; 11. 7.

<p>Brenno-Cáre, see Cáre S&aolig;lmundarson.

<p>Brenno-Flose, Cr. 6: 7. 1; 8. 2.

<p>Brese Þórmóðarson, see Berse.

<p>Brodd-Helge Þórgilsson, III. 8. 1: IV. 3. 1; 3. 3: Gen. A. 26; 28&ndash;29: Mant. 5. 6: Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Brodde Þóresson, Mant. 4. 2.

<p>Brodde Þóroddzson, Gen. B. 8 (= Odde Yrarson?)

<p>Broddr, b. of Hialmgerðr, III. 14. 10.

<p><hi>Br&aolig;ndolfr Naddodzson</hi> (al. Brynjolfr), V. 13. 4: Gen. A. 15 (Runolfr).

<p>Br&aolig;ndolfr Þórleifsson, V. 13. 4.

<p>Brunda-Bialbe, I. 8. 1.

<p>Brúne, IV. 18. 7.

<p>Brúne Geirmundarson, II. 3. 9.

<p><hi>Brúne enn Hvíte Háreksson</hi>, III. 12. 4.

<p>Bryngerðr, m. of Friðleifr í Holte, III. 11. 3.

<p>Bryngerðr Þióðarsdótter, III. 11. 4.

<p>Brynhildr Buðladótter, Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Brynjolfr Auðunnarson, V. 9. 3.

<p><hi>Brynjolfr enn Gamle Þórgeirsson</hi>, IV. 3. 5&ndash;8; 4. 3; 5. 1&ndash;3; 10. 2; 10. 7; 11. 4; 11. 6: V. 17. 2.

<p>Brynjolfr (al. Þórgils) í Hvamme í Mýdale, IV. 18. 1.

<p>Brynjolfr Naddodzson, see Br&aolig;ndolfr.

<p>Buðle, mythical king, f. of Brynhildr, Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Burizlaf [Bogi-slaw], king of Novgorod, III. 9. 1.

<p>Bæjar-menu, Od. 4. 3.



<div3 id=ixC>
<head>C</head>


<p>Caðall Bialfason, Gen. A. 11.

<p>Caðall, f. of Þórdís, III. 15. 6.

<p>Caðall, f. of Þórgeirr Caðalsson, II. 15. 11.

<p>Caðlín G&aolig;ngo-Hrólfsdótter, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3.

<p>Cale Cvistzson, I. 7. 7; 10. 4.

<p>Calixtus, Pope, Io. 14. 3.

<p><hi>Calman</hi>, I. 7. 2: II. 1. 1&ndash;2.

<p><hi>Campa-Grímr</hi>, II. 15. 13: III. 17. 3.

<p>Cáre Cylansson, II. 1. 2.

<p>Cáre S&aolig;lmundarson (Brenno- <hi>or</hi> Svíðo-Cáre), V. 13. 5: Gen. A. 19.

<p>Cáre, see also Káre.

<p><hi>Carle</hi>, a thrall of Ingolfr Arnarson, I. 3. 7&ndash;8.

<p>Carle Ævarsson, III. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Carlsefne, Lib. 305. 18: Hv. 3. 1 (<hi lang=en-UK>see also</hi> Þórfinnr).

<p>Cárr Coðransson, III. 11. 5.

<p>Cárr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Cárr Þórmóðarson, V. 16. 2.

<p>Caun konungr Solgason, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16 (B&aolig;ðvarsson).

<p><hi>Ceallacr Biarnarson á Ceallacsst&aolig;ðom</hi> (Barna-Ceallacr), II. 16. 1&ndash;2; 17. 6: Th. 9. 2.

<p>Ceallacr Biarnarson Hvalmage, II. 16. 1.

<p>&ast;Ceallacr Cearvalsson, V. 7. 1.

<p><hi>Ceallacr enn Gamle Biarnarson</hi>, II. 5. 7; 8. 1; 9. 3&ndash;4: V. 17. 4: Gen. B. 10: Th. 7. 3; 9. 3.

<p>Ceallacr, f. of Hrólfr at Ballará, II. 17. 6 (but cf. I. 11. 2).

<p>Ceallacr Hrólfsson, I. 11. 2.

<p>Ceallacr iarl á Iamtalande, II. 9. 1: Th. 1. 1; 2. 1.

<p>Cealleklingar, Th. 7. 3; 9. 2&ndash;10. 1.

<p>Cearan, a thrall of Geirmundr Heliar-skinn, II. 17. 6.

<p>Cearfal, King of the Irish, see Cearval.

<p>Cearleifr, see Bi&aolig;rn Cearleifsson.

<p>Ceartan Ásgeirsson, II. 15. 9<hi>b</hi>: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Ceartan, s. of Goðríðr Másdótter, II. 8. 5.

<p>Ceartan Óleifsson, II. 9. 3; 15. 9; 17. 4; 29. 1: Gen. A. 35: B. 4&ndash;5: Cr. 6. 3&ndash;6; 7. 1.

<p>Ceartan Þórhallzson, II. 15. 9<hi>b</hi>: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Ceartan Þóroddzson at Fróð-&aoacute;, II. 22. 8.

<p>&ast;Cearval [Cearbhall], King of the Irish, I. 1. 1: III. 11. 1; 13. 2: V. 7. 1; 9. 10; 16. 6: Gen. A. 32; B. 15: Th. 1. 4.

<p>Cecilia, d. of Liný, II. 22. 6.

<p>Celestinus, Pope, Pol. 3. 5; 14. 5; 15. 2.

<p>Ceolvor, see Ciolv&aolig;r.

<p>Ceotve enn Auðge, see Kiotve.

<p>Cero-Berse Halldórsson, Gen. B. 13.

<pb id=pb651 n=651><p><hi>Cetill Blundr</hi> (Blund-Cetill; Aurnólfs-son?), I. 9. 5; 10. 3: II. 2. 5; 3. 2; 15. 14.

<p>&ast;<hi>Cetill Bresason</hi>, I. 7. 1; 7. 9&ndash;10: II. 2. 1.

<p>Cetill á Cetils-st&aolig;ðom, II. 15. 2.

<p><hi>Cetill Gufa Orlygsson</hi>, I. 7. 12; 8. 4; 9. 3: II. 4. 12; 17. 6; 20. 2&ndash;6; 27. 1.

<p>Ciolv&aolig;r, mother&apos;s sister of Tungo-Oddr, I. 10. 4: II. 26. 2.

<p>Claufe, see Klaufe.

<p>Cleppiarn Einarsson, II. 15. 2.

<p>Cleppiarn enn Gamle Þórolfsson, I. 6. 5.

<p>Cleppr I&aolig;rundarson, I. 7. 3.

<p>Cloco-ætt, IV. 10. 2.

<p>Cn&aolig;rr  H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2; 12. 7.

<p>Coðran Eilífsson Arnar, III. 6. 6: Cr. 1. 1; 1. 4: Thorv. 1 ff.

<p>Coðran Hermundarson, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Coðran Ormsson, s. of Herdís Bolladótter, II. 21. 2: Gen. B. 14.

<p>Coðran Svarth&aolig;fðason, Ch. 636.

<p>Coðran, s. of Þióðgerðr Coðransdótter, III. 11. 5.

<p>Coðran, s. of Þióðgerðr Flókadótter, III. 11. 5.

<p><hi>Colbeinn Clakh&aolig;fðe Atlason</hi>, II. 5. 5.

<p>Colbeinn, f. of Flose, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Colbeinn Flosason Valla-Brandzsonar, V. 9. 1: p. 640. 5.

<p>Colbeinn Flosason Þórðarsonar, L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, Gen. B. 15: Lib. 9. 4; 9. 7.

<p>Colbeinn, sister&apos;s son of Hróarr Tungo-Goðe, IV. 7. 3.

<p>Colbeinn Oddbiarnarson, V. 4. 3.

<p><hi>Colbeinn Sigmundarson í Colbeinsdal</hi>, III. 9. 2; 9. 4; 10. 1.

<p>Colbeinn Sigvatzson, IV. 16. 1.

<p>Colbeinn Tumason, Pol. 12. 1: Gm. 606.

<p>Colbeinn Unge (Arnórsson), Gen. A. 1.

<p>Colbeinn Þórðarson Eysteinssonar, II. 15. 7; 15. 11.

<p>Colbeinn Þórðarson Freysgoða, IV. 18. 6: Gen. A. 25: Cr. 6. 3; 6 B&ast;; 7. 1; 8. 2.

<p>Colbeinn á Víðimýre, Gm. 607&ndash;9.

<p>Colfinna, see Kolfinna.

<p>Colgríma Beinesdótter, V. 13. 4.

<p><hi>Colgrímr enn Gamle Hrólfsson</hi>, I. 7. 7; 9. 1: V. 11. 5; 17. 2.

<p>Colgrímr Hialtason, IV. 11. 2.

<p>Colgrímr Þórgeirsson, see Collgrímr.

<p>Colgrímr Þórhallason, I. 7. 7.

<p><hi>Colle í Collafirðe</hi>, II. 29. 4.

<p><hi>Colle í Collavík</hi>, III. 22. 5.

<p><hi>Colle Hroallzson</hi> (<hi>Hof-Colle</hi>), II. 4. 15; 20. 7.

<p>Colle Klæingsson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Colle Þórðarson Blígs, III. 11. 7.

<p>Colle Þórmóðarson, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Collgrímr [al. Colgrímr] Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

<p>Collr Ceallaksson, I. 11. 2.

<p><hi>Collr í Collzvík</hi>, sworn brother of &OElig;rlygr Hrappsson, I. 6. 2: II. 21. 4.

<p>Collr enn Gráe Þórsteinsson, IV. 11. 8.

<p>Collr Illogason ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

<p>Collr  Miðfiarðar-Skeggjason, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3.

<p>Collr Þórbiarnarson Loka, or Collr Þórgilsson frá Þórgilsst&aolig;ðom, II. 19. 5; 20. 2.

<p>Collr Veðrar-Grímsson, see Dala-Collr.

<p>Collsveinn Biarnarson, Gm. 612.

<p><hi>Collsveinn enn Ramme</hi>, III. 8. 10.

<p>Colr, a bishop, Mant. 6. 1&ndash;2: Hv. 1. 6; 1. 10.

<p><hi>Colr at Colgr&aolig;fom</hi>, II. 8. 2.

<p>Colr Egilsson, Gen. A. 12.

<p>Colr Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 5.

<p>Colr í L&oeacute;kjarbug, Cr. 5. 2.

<p>Colr, a Norseman, Pol. 5. 2.

<p><hi>Colr</hi> (al. <hi>Kolle</hi>) <hi>Óttarsson Ballar</hi>, V. 7. 7: Gen. 12.

<p>Colr Síðo-Hallzson, IV. 14. 3: Gen. B. 15.

<p>Colr Víkverja-byscop Þórkelsson, V. 14. 5: Lib. 8. 1; 9. 1: Cr. 10. 2: Hv. 1. 7 <hi>b</hi>: Io. 3. 3.

<p>Colr Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 19; 21.

<p>Colskeggr, see Kolskeggr.

<p>Coltorfa, sister of Hialte, Cr. 8. 2.

<p>Columcilla [Columba o&apos; the Cells], I. 6. 1, 4; 7. 6.

<p>&ast;Conall, f. of Ásólfr Alscic, I. 7. 3.

<p>Conall Ketilsson, III. 18. 3; 19. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Conall Sockason, III. 19. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Conall Steinmóðarson, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1.

<p>&ast;Core, an Irish thrall of Cetill Gufa, II. 20. 3; 20. 5.

<p>Cormacr Ogmundarson, II. 4. 8.

<p>&ast;Cormlod [Gormflaith], d. of Cearval, [Cearbhall] King of the Irish, V. 16. 6.

<p>Crafla, f. of Þórsteinn (= Þórkell Crafla?), II. 21. 1.

<p><hi>Crumr á Hafra-nese</hi>, IV. 10. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Crymlingar, IV. 10. 6.

<p>Crossvíkingar, IV. 10. 5.

<p>Cugallde Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Cugge, see Þórkell Cugge.

<p>Cvistr ... steinsson, I. 7. 7.

<p>&ast;<hi>Cylan</hi>, b. of Calman, II. 1. 2.

<p>Cylan Cárason, II. 1. 2.

<pb id=pb652 n=652>
<div3 id=ixD>
<head>D</head>


<p>Dagr, early king, Lib. 306. 7.

<p>Dagr, King of Denmark, Cr. 8. 8.

<p>Dagr Þórkelsson ens Háva, III. 21. 2.

<p>Dagrún Þórkelsdótter Bundinfóta, V. 6. 3.

<p>Dagstyggr Risa-konungr, III. 9. 1.

<p>Dagæ [Daðe] Skáld Bárðarson, III. 11. 2.

<p>Dala-Collr, I. 20. 7 (= Hof-Colle?)

<p><hi>Dala-Collr Veðrar-Grímsson</hi>, II. 14. 3; 14. 9: III. 18. 1: Gen. A. 35.

<p>Dalcr Hafliðason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Dalcr Refsson, II. 5. 6.

<p>Dalla Ketilsdótter, III. 20. 3.

<p>Dalla Onundardótter, II. 4. 8.

<p>Dalla Þórvallzdótter, m. of Bishop Gizor, III. 4. 1: V. 13. 3: Gen. B. 4: Cr. 10. 1: Hv. 1. 2; 2. 6; 2. 8: p. 595&ndash;6.

<p>Darre Ormsson, V. 16. 4.

<p>Digr-Ketill, Gen. B. 15: Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Digr-Ormr Þórgilsson Giallanda, III. 5. 15; 6. 3.

<p>Diúpd&oeacute;ler, Lib. 2. 2.

<p>Dómaldr, early king, Lib. 306. 6.

<p>Dómarr, early king, Lib. 306. 6.

<p>&ast;Drafdrit, a thrall of Hi&aolig;rleifr, I. 3. 4.

<p>Drafle, f. of Oddr, II. 11. 7.

<p>Droplaug (Þórgrímsdótter), Gen. A. 19: Gen. B. 15.

<p>Drumb-Oddr, V. 14. 6.

<p>&ast;Dufan í Dufans-dal, II. 22. 3.

<p>Dufgus, f. of Svarth&aolig;fðe, p. 639. 12.

<p>Dufnall Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

<p>&ast;Dufnial, s. of Cearval, King of the Irish, IV. 17. 5 (Dofnial): V. 9. 10.

<p>&ast;Dufþacr Dufnialsson, V. 9. 10.

<p>&ast;Dufþacr í Dufþacs-holte, V. 4. 2; 7. 4.

<p>&ast;Dufþacr, a thrall of Hi&aolig;rleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 4; 3. 7.

<p>Dyggve, early king, Lib. 306. 6.

<p><hi>Dýre í Dýra-firðe</hi>, II. 23. 1.

<p>Dýrfinna, d. of Þórunn, III. 14. 12.



<div3 id=ixE>
<head>E</head>


<p>Eadmund, King of England, Lib. 1. 1; 3. 4; 7. 9; 10. 12. (See also Iátmundr.)

<p>&ast;Eðna Cetilsdótter, I. 9. 3.

<p>Egill Ásbiarnarson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Egill Auðunnarson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

<p>Egill Colsson, V. 7. 7: Gen. 12.

<p>Egill Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

<p>Egill Hrifloson, p. 641. 15.

<p><hi>Egill enn Rauðe</hi>, IV. 10. 3.

<p>Egill Síðo-Hallzson, IV. 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 10; 15: Lib. 305. 13: Cr. 10. 7: Io. 1. 1; 2. 2.

<p>Egill Skalla-Grímsson, II. 4. 1; 15. 9; 15. 4; 20. 5: V. 17. 4.

<p>Egill Steinbiarnarson Corts, IV. 2. 2.

<p>Egill V&aolig;lo-Steinsson, II. 24. 2; 24. 5.

<p>Egill Vendil-craca, Lib. 306. 8.

<p>Egill Þórðarson Freysgoða, Gen. A. 10; 25.

<p>Eiðr Miðfiarðar-Skeggjason, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4.

<p>Eiðr Þórhallzson, p. 641, 38.

<p>Eilífr enn Auðge Onundarson, V. 7. 2; 14. 7.

<p>Eilífr Helgason Biolo, Cr. 3. 5: Thorv. 7.

<p>Eilífr Ketilsson Einhenda, II. 15. 14: V. 9. 6; 13. 1: Gen. B. 7.

<p><hi>Eilífr í Odda</hi>, V. 7. 5.

<p><hi>Eilífr Orn Atlason</hi>, III. 6. 6: Thorv. 1: Gen. A. 32 (Bárðarson): Cr. 1. 1.

<p>Eilífr enn Prúðe Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1&ndash;2

<p>Eilífr enn Unge Eilífsson, V. 7. 5; 8. 7; 9. 4.

<p>Eilífr Valla-Brannzson, V. 3. 7.

<p>Einarr ábóte Mársson, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Einarr Arason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Einarr Auðunnarson Rotins, III. 15. 8; 19. 3&ndash;4: Gen. A. 32: Lib. 305. 21.

<p>Einarr Bruðr Biarnason, p. 640. 40.

<p>Einarr Cetilsson frá Cetils-st&aolig;ðom, II. 15. 1.

<p>Einarr Cleppsson, I. 7. 3.

<p>Einarr Conalsson, III. 19. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Einarr í Einarsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

<p>Einarr Eyjolfsson, p. 642. 5.

<p>Einarr Flosason, p. 640. 8.

<p>Einarr forkr, Gm. 606.

<p>Einarr Gilsson, p. 599.

<p>Einarr Grímsson, p. 640. 18.

<p>Einarr, f. of Halldóra, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Einarr Halldórsson, III. 14. 19.

<p>Einarr Helgoson, Lib. 305. 21.

<p>Einarr Hialtlendingr, V. 15. 2.

<p>Einarr Joansson Loptzsonar, Od. 2. 2.

<p>Einarr Ketilsson Þórvallzsonar, III. 14. 10.

<p>Einarr Magnússon, IV. 14. 4: V. 9. 6: Gen. B. 10: Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Einarr Nesja-Cniúcsson, II. 20. 8.

<p>Einarr Olvesson Barna-karls, V. 13. 1; 16. 3: Gen. A. 16: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Einarr Osvífsson, II. 9. 3.

<p>Einarr Sigmundarson, see Laugarbrecko-Einarr.

<p>Einarr Skálaglam Helgason, II. 9. 3.

<p>Einarr Sniallsson, Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Einarr Teitsson of Stafaholt, II. 3. 7; 7. 1; 26. 4.

<p>Einarr Þóresson Graut-Atlasonar, IV. 3. 3.

<pb id=pb653 n=653><p><hi>Einarr Þórgeirsson</hi>, III. 22. 1.

<p>Einarr Þórsteinsson, III. 19. 4.

<p>Einarr Þórvallzson, Ch. 637.

<p>Eindriðe Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Eindriðe Illogason ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

<p>Eiríkr, bishop of Stavanger, archbishop of Trondhjem, Þorl 8. 2: Pol. 3. 2; 3. 5; 7. 3: Gm. 613, 615.

<p>Eiríkr Eymundarson, King of Sweden, I. 1. 1: II. 9. 1.

<p>Eiríkr Gnúpsson, bishop  of Greenland, I. 6. 6.

<p><hi>Eiríkr or Goðd&aolig;lom Hroallzson</hi>, III. 6. 3; 7. 7&ndash;8; 8. 1; 8. 3; 8. 5: IV. 3. 1: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 28 (Geirmundarson Hroallzsonar); 33 (id.).

<p>Eiríkr iarl Hákonarson, Lib. 7. 9: p. 329, 8: Cr. 8. 12.

<p>Eiríkr H&aolig;gnason ens Hvíta, II. 21. 1.

<p>Eiríkr H&aolig;rðakonungr, II. 17. 3.

<p>Eiríkr Hunda-Steinarsson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p><hi>Eiríkr í Keldo-dal</hi>, II. 22. 6.

<p>Eiríkr Magnússon, King of Norway, Ch. 638.

<p>Eiríkr Olfuss, III. 15. 2; 15. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Eiríkr Orðig-skegge, III. 8. 1: Gen. A. 28. 33.

<p>Eiríkr Ragnarsson Loðbrókar, Mant. 5. 1.

<p><hi>Eiríkr Rauðe Þórvallzson</hi>, II. 12. 1&ndash;10; 15.4; 19. 4; 28. 3: Lib. 6. 1.

<p>Eiríkr Sigurðarson Bióðaskalla, á Ofrost&aolig;ðom, Gen. B. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Eiríkr iarl Sigurðarson, b. of King Sverrer, Þorl. 15. 1.

<p><hi>Eiríkr Snara</hi>, II. 28. 5.

<p>Eiríkr á Snorra-st&aolig;ðom, Pol. 7. 1.

<p>Eiríkr at Uppsala, King of the Swedes, Lib. 7. 9.

<p>Eiríkr Víkinga-Kárason, Gen. B. 7: Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

<p>Eirny Þiðrandadótter, II. 18. 1.

<p>Elldgrímr, s. of Arnbiorg, II. 3. 5.

<p>Elldiarn Arnórsson, p. 641. 50.

<p>Elfraðr enn Ríki [Ælfred the mighty], King of England, I. 1. 1.

<p>Elín, d. of King Burizlaf, III. 9. 1.

<p>Elliða-Grímr Ásgrímsson, III. 15. 5: V. 7. 8: Gen. A. 13.

<p>Erlendr Hímalde Jónsson, II. 9. 3.

<p>Erlendr enn Sterke Óláfsson, f. of Haukr, V. 17. 1: Mant. 5. 1: p. 639. 9; 640. 5, etc.

<p>Erlendr prestr, Gm. 612.

<p>Erlingr (al. Egill) Eyvindarson, V. 16. 10.

<p>Erlingr iarl, Þorl. 8. 1; 15. 1.

<p>Erlingr Knýtir, III. 13. 2.

<p>Erlingr Skiálgsson, Gen. B. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Erlygr: see &OElig;rlygr.

<p>Erplingar, II. 15. 7.

<p>Erpr Lútande, II. 2. 1.

<p>&ast;Erpr Meldunsson iarls, II. 14. 4; 15. 7; 15. 11.

<p>Esbergingar, I. 6. 4.

<p>Esph&oeacute;lingar, p. 277.

<p>Eugenius, Pope, Hv. 5. 11.

<p>Eydís Einarsdótter, III. 19. 4.

<p>Eyfirðingar, Lib. 2. 1: Cr. 4. 3.

<p><hi>Eyfr&oelig;ðr enn Gamle</hi>, V. 14. 6.

<p>Eyja (al. Evia) Ingiallzdótter, II. 20. 8.

<p>Eyjarr Þórolfsson Fasthalda, III. 1. 2.

<p>Eyjolfr B&aolig;lverksson, Gen. A. 37.

<p>Eyjolfr Egilsson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

<p>Eyjolfr Einarsson Auðunnarsonar, see Eyjolfr Valgerðarson.

<p>Eyjolfr Einarsson Þórgeirssonar, III. 22. 1.

<p>Eyjolfr Eyjarsson, III. 2. 3.

<p>Eyjolfr Goðmundarson Gása, p. 641. 45.

<p>Eyjolfr enn Gráe Þórðarson Gellis, II. 15. 8; 15. 14; 21. 1; 24. 2: Gen. A. 37: Lib. 306. 16: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Eyjolfr Hallbiarnarson, II. 18. 1.

<p>Eyjolfr prestr Hallzson, Gm. 607.

<p>Eyjolfr enn Halte Goðmundarson ens Ríka, III. 4. 1; 7. 1; 21. 2: Gen. B. 4; 15: Lib. 306. 1.

<p>Eyjolfr Illogason ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

<p>Eyjolfr Ingiallzson Helgasonar ens Magra, III. 14. 4.

<p>Eyjolfr Narfason, III. 14. 11.

<p>Eyjolfr Nesja-Cniúcsson, II. 20. 8.

<p>Eyjolfr Saurr, II. 12. 1.

<p>Eyjolfr Skeggjason, V. 2. 2.

<p>Eyjolfr Snorrason, Gm. 612&ndash;14.

<p>Eyjolfr Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Eyjolfr in Stafaholt, Od. 3. 1; 4. 1.

<p>Eyjolfr Surtzson, II. 5. 10.

<p>Eyjolfr Sæmundarson, Hv. 4. 10: Þorl. 3. 1.

<p>Eyjolfr Valgerðarson [s. of Einarr Auðunnarson], III. 15. 8; 15. 12; 19. 3&ndash;4: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 32: Mant. 3. 1: Lib. 305. 21: Cr. 1. 2; 1. 3; 2. 4.

<p>Eyjolfr Þórðarson Hreðo, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Eyjolfr Þórkelsson Kappa, II. 23. 2.

<p>Eyjolfr Þórsteinsson, Ch. 633.

<p>Eyjolfr Æsoson, II. 12. 2; 16. 1.

<p>Eylaugr, hersir or Sogne, I. 4. 1.

<p>Eymundr Aska-spiller Þóresson, Gen. B. 6.

<p>Eymundr, f. of Eiríkr, King of the Swedes, I. 1. 1.

<p>Eyrbyggjar, II. 11. 6.

<pb id=pb654 n=654><p>Eysteinn Aðilsson, Lib. 306. 11.

<p>Eysteinn Auðunnarson, III. 4. 1.

<p>Eysteinn, King of the Danes, V. 2. 1.

<p><hi>Eysteinn enn Digre</hi>, IV. 16. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Eysteinn Eiðsson, I. 10. 7.

<p>Eysteinn Eilífsson Arnar, III. 6. 6.

<p>Eysteinn Erlendzson, archbishop of Trondhjem, II. 9. 3: Hv. 5. 9; 5. 10: Þorl. 7. 2; 8. 1; 15. 1: p. 569: Od. 1. 1; 2. 5.

<p>Eysteinn fret, Lib. pr. 2.

<p>Eysteinn Glumra Ívarsson, II. 14. 1: III. 15. 12: IV. 14. 1: Gen. A. 19.

<p><hi>Eysteinn Hranason</hi>, IV. 16. 4.

<p>Eysteinn Harallzson, King of Norway, Hv. 5. 12; 5. 13.

<p>Eysteinn Magnússon, King of Norway, Lib. 10. 12: Hv. 3. 11; 3. 13: Io. 7. 7; 14. 3.

<p><hi>Eysteinn Meinfretr Álfsson</hi>, II. 15. 11: III. 1. 1.

<p><hi>Eysteinn Radulfsson</hi> (al. <hi>Randulfsson</hi>), III. 14. 20.

<p>Eysteinn Þórbergsson, I. 10. 7: V. 3. 4.

<p>Eysteinn Þórgeirsson, II. 5. 14.

<p>Eyvara Þórhallzdótter, sister of Bp. Thorlak, Þorl. 4. 4.

<p><hi>Eysteinn Þórsteinsson Drangakarls</hi>, IV. 18. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Eysteinn Þórsteinsson Titlings, IV. 18. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Eyvindr iarl Arnmóðsson, V. 16. 4.

<p><hi>Eyvindr Auðkúla</hi>, III. 5. 14.

<p>Eyvindr Austmaðr Biarnarson, II. 14. 1; 23. 2; 26. 2: III. 13. 2: 15. 1: V. 12. 5: Gen. A. 32: Th. 1. 4: Lib. 2. 1.

<p>Eyvindr Baugsson, V. 7. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Eyvindr, s. of Birna, II. 21. 1.

<p>Eyvindr, counsellor of Earl Hákon, II. 24. 6.

<p><hi>Eyvindr Cné</hi>, II. 22. 5; 24. 8.

<p>Eyvindr Eiki-krókr Helgason, II. 5. 11: IV. 14. 10.

<p>Eyvindr Elldr, II. 15. 10.

<p>Eyvindr enn Eyverske, IV. 19. 1; 19. 4.

<p><hi>Eyvindr Hane</hi>, III. 14. 21.

<p><hi>Eyvindr Herr&oelig;ðarson</hi>, II. 28. 4.

<p>Eyvindr Hialte Helgason, I. 5. 1.

<p>Eyvindr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

<p><hi>Eyvindr Karpe</hi>, IV. 15. 6; 18. 1; 18. 3: Gen. A. 4; 10; 25 (Karfe).

<p>Eyvindr Kollsveinsson, I. 5. 1.

<p>Eyvindr í Kvígo-v&aoacute;gom, V. 16. 3; 16. 10.

<p>Eyvindr Lambe (Berðlo-Kárason), V. 5. 1&ndash;2.

<p><hi>Eyvindr Loðinsson Onguls</hi>, III. 16. 5.

<p>Eyvindr í Mióva-firðe, IV. 10. 2.

<p>Eyvindr Skalda-spiller Finnzson, V. 5. 1.

<p>Eyvindr Smiðr Þórðarson Illoga, IV. 14. 10.

<p><hi>Eyvindr S&oelig;rkver</hi>, III. 5. 2; 5. 8; 5. 16; 6. 3.

<p>Eyvindr Vápne Herjolfsson, IV. 11. 3.

<p><hi>Eyvindr Vápne Þórsteinsson</hi>, IV. 2. 1&ndash;3.

<p>Eyvindr Þórgrímsson, V. 16. 6.

<p><hi>Eyvindr Þórsteinsson H&aolig;fða</hi>, III. 17. 2; 19. 1&ndash;4; V. 17. 2.

<p>Eyþiófr, f. of Helge Eyþiófsson, II. 22. 3.



<div3 id=ixF>
<head>F</head>


<p>Falke Þórarensson, p. 642. 1.

<p>Fastný Brynjolfsdótter ens Gamla, IV. 3. 6.

<p>Faxe, one of Flóke&apos;s followers, I. 2. 3.

<p>Fiarska-Fiðr, see Fiska-Fiðr.

<p>Fiðr, see Finnr.

<p>Finna Hrútzdótter, II. 15. 10.

<p>Finna Skoftadótter, II. 5. 6.

<p>Finna Þórmóðardótter, V. 13. 5.

<p>Finnboge Colbeinsson, II. 5. 5.

<p>Finnboge Helgason, II. 5. 11.

<p>Finnboge enn Ramme Ásbiarnarson, III. 16. 5.

<p>Finnboge Þórgeirsson, II. 5. 14.

<p>Finnboge enn Ramme Geirsson, II. 6. 4.

<p>Finne enn Draumspake Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

<p><hi>Finne í Finna-firðe</hi>, IV. 1. 2.

<p>Finne Mottulsson, II. 2. 1.

<p>Finngeirr Þórsteinsson Ondors, II. 11. 1; 11. 3: Th. 7. 1.

<p>Finnr, herra, Ch. 638.

<p><hi>Finnr enn Auðge Halldórsson</hi>, I. 7. 8; 7. 12: II. 3. 1: V. 11. 6.

<p>Finnr Hallzson L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, IV. 5. 4: V. 16. 10: Hv. 4. 12.

<p>Finnr Otkelsson, V. 3. 4.

<p>Finnr enn Skiálge Eyvindarson, V. 5. 2.

<p>Finnvarðr Hallkelsson, II. 2. 1.

<p>Finnvarðr Þórkelsson, II. 6. 5.

<p>Fiolner, Lib. 306. 5.

<p>Fiorleif (al. Freyleif) Eyvindardótter, III. 17. 2; 18. 2; 19. 1; 19. 5.

<p>Fiska-Fiðr, II. 23. 2 (al. Fiarska-Fiðr; = Finnr Fiske Ketilsson?).

<p>Fleinn Hi&aolig;rsson, the Poet, V. 2. 1.

<p>Flióta-menn, Gen. A. 32.

<p><hi>Flóke</hi>, a thrall of Cetill Gufa, I. 9. 3: II. 20. 3.

<p>Flóke, f. of Gnúpr, I. 9. 6.

<p><hi>Flóke Vilgerðarson</hi> (al. <hi>Glámsson</hi>), I. 2. 3; 3. 3: III. 11. 5.

<p>Flose Biarnarson, priest, Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 5, 7, etc.

<p>Flose Eiríksson, II. 28. 5.

<pb id=pb655 n=655><p>Flose Kolbeinsson, IV. 3. 1 = Flose Valla-Brannzson, V. 9. 1.

<p><hi>Flose enn Norræne Þórbiarnarson ens Gaulverska</hi>, V. 6. 2; 8. 4; 9. 1&ndash;2; 10. 2.

<p>Flose Þórðarson Freysgoða, IV. 18. 6: Gen. A. 21; 25; 28; B. 15: Nj. 365.

<p>Flugo-Grímr Snorrason, II. 23. 2.

<p>Fostolfr Véfr&oelig;ðarson, III. 6. 3.

<p>Freygerðr Hallzdótter, V. 16. 10.

<p>Freygerðr Hrafnsdótter ens Heimska, V. 3. 1.

<p>Freys-gyðlingar, V. 17. 2.

<p><hi>Freysteinn enn Fagre</hi>, IV. 10. 4.

<p>Freyviðr Álfsson, II. 5. 6.

<p>Friðgerðr Cearvalsdótter Írakonungs, III. 11. 1: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Friðgerðr Hyrningsdótter, Gen. B. 9; 11.

<p>Friðgerðr Illogadótter ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

<p>Friðgerðr Þórðardótter frá H&aolig;fða, II. 15. 14: III. 11. 2: Cr. 2. 2.

<p>Friðgerðr Þóresdótter Himo, III. 11. 2.

<p><hi>Friðleifr í Holte</hi>, III. 11. 4.

<p>Friðleifr á Stafshóle, III. 12. 2 (= Oddleifr ?).

<p><hi>Friðmundr í Fors&oelig;lo-dal</hi>, III. 5. 2; 5. 7.

<p>Friðrekr, Bishop, Mant. 6. 1; 6. 2: Lib. 8. 1: Cr. 1. 1; 2. 4: Thorv. 4: p. 414: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Fróðe Hr&oelig;reksson, Gen. A. 1.

<p>Fróðe, king, f. of Ingialldr, III. 13. 1: Gen. B. 12.

<p>Fróðe Vemundarson ens Gamla, I. 3. 10: V. 10. 1; 10. 4.




<div3 id=ixG>
<head>G</head>


<p>Galdra-Heðinn, Cr. 4. 3.

<p>&ast;<hi>Galman</hi> (al. <hi>Galmr</hi>) <hi>á Galmans-str&aolig;nd</hi>, III. 14. 12.

<p>Galte Arnmóðsson, III. 7. 4; 20. 3.

<p>Galte Grísarson í Áse, III. 20. 4; 22. 1.

<p>Galte Óttarsson, III. 5. 16.

<p>Galte Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

<p>Gamle Skeggjason Skammhondungs, III. 1. 2.

<p>Gamle Þórðarson, III. 1. 2.

<p>Garðarr Svávarsson, I. 2. 1&ndash;2: III. 18. 2; 19. 2: IV. 5. 2; 7. 1: Gen. 5.

<p>Gaukr Þórkelsson Trandils, V. 13. 3.

<p>Gautr Gautreksson, II. 17. 6.

<p><hi>Gautr í Gautz-dale</hi>, III. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Gautr, see Hialmon-Gautr.

<p>Gautrekr enn Orve, II. 17. 6.

<p>Geirbi&aolig;rg Balkadótter, I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

<p>Geire Biarnarson at Lundom, IV. 15. 5.

<p><hi>Geire í Geiradal</hi>, II. 17. 4: III. 10. 2; 21. 3.

<p>Geire Þórkelsson, IV. 15. 5.

<p>Geirfinnr enn Rauðe Solvason, Gen. A. 10.

<p>Geirhilldr, a witch, III. 14. 18.

<p>Geirhilldr Eiríksdótter, see Geirríðr.

<p>Geirhilldr, d. of Flóke Vilgerðarson, I. 2. 3.

<p>Geirlaug Árnadótter, Od. 3. 1.

<p>Geirlaug, d. of Oddný, p. 641. 20, 39.

<p>Geirlaug Skúladótter, IV. 1. 1.

<p>Geirlaug Steinmóðsdótter, Cr. 1. 5.

<p>Geirlaug (al. Þórlaug) Þórmóðardótter, I. 7. 2; 10. 1.

<p><hi>Geirleifr Eiríkson</hi>, I. 6. 8: II. 21. 1&ndash;3: Th. 7. 3.

<p><hi>Geirleifr Hrappson í Haga</hi>, III. 14. 14; 19. 5.

<p>Geirleifr Onundarson, Gen. A. 21.

<p>Geirleifr, f. of Þórsteinn Titlingr, Gen. A. 25.

<p>Geirmundr Biarnarson Goll-bera, I. 9. 1.

<p>Geirmundr Eiríksson Orðigskeggja, III. 8. 1 (= Hróalldr Gen. A. 28).

<p><hi>Geirmundr Gunnbiarnarson</hi>, II. 3. 9.

<p><hi>Geirmundr Heljar-skinn Hi&aolig;rsson</hi>, II. 17. 2&ndash;4; 17. 6; 20. 4; 22. 1; 25. 1; 27. 1&ndash;2: III. 5. 12: V. 17. 2: Gen. B. 8; 11: Mant. 274&ndash;7.

<p>Geirmundr Hróallzson, Gen. A. 28; 33; = Hróalldr Geirmundarson, III. 8. 1.

<p>Geirmundr &OElig;rlygsson, I. 6. 4.

<p>Geirmundr Sæmundarson, III. 7. 1; 12. 2.

<p>Geirmundr Þórgrímsson of Máva-hlíð, II. 7. 2.

<p>Geirmundr Þrasason, V. 2. 2.

<p>Geirný Gnúpsdótter, V. 9. 8.

<p>Geirolfr under Geirolfsgnúpe, II. 28. 2.

<p>Geirolfr Ulfsson, III. 18. 3.

<p><hi>Geirr enn Auðge Cetilsson Blunds</hi>, I. 9. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Geirr, f. of Finnboge enn Ramme (Fróðe), II. 6. 4.

<p>Geirr Goðe Ásgeirsson, V. 7. 8; 14. 7; 17. 4: Gen. A. 14.

<p>Geirr, foster brother of H&aolig;rðr Grímkellsson, I. 10. 5.

<p>Geirríðr, w. of Bi&aolig;rn B&aolig;lverksson, II. 11. 4: Th. 8. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Geirríðr (al. Geirhildr) Eiríksdótter Olfuss, III. 15. 5.

<p>Geirríðr Geirmundardótter, II. 17. 6.

<p>Geirríðr Þórolfsdótter Bægifótz, II. 7. 6; 11. 5: Th. 8. 3.

<p><hi>Geirr&oelig;ðr á Eyre</hi>, II. 11. 1&ndash;5: Th. 7. 1; 8. 1; 9. 3.

<p>&ast;Geirroðr, a thrall of Hi&aolig;rleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 4.

<p>Geirsteinn á I&aolig;rva, II. 12. 1.

<p><hi>Geirsteinn Cialke</hi>, II. 20. 9.

<p><hi>Geirþiófr Valþiófsson</hi>, II. 22. 5.

<pb id=pb656 n=656><p>Geirþiófr Þórolfsson Sparrar, II. 21. 4.

<p>Geiter Lýtingsson í Krossavík, IV. 2. 2; 3. 2: Gen. A. 19: B. 15: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Geitlendingar, I. 11. 3.

<p>Gelasius, Pope, Hv. 3. 11.

<p>Geller B&aolig;lverksson L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, II. 21. 1: Lib. 8. 6; 9. 5: Hv. 1. 12.

<p>Geller Illogason ens Ramma, II. 7. 11.

<p>Geller Ormsson, III. 15. 8.

<p>Geller Þórkelsson, II. 9. 3; 15. 8; 19. 2: Gen. B. 14: Mant. 1. 7: Lib. 4. 2; 9. 2: p. 306.

<p>Gerðr B&aolig;ðvarsdótter, III. 1. 2.

<p>Gerðr Ceallacsdótter, II. 5. 7;  9. 4: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Gerðr Vaðadótter, V. 12. 3.

<p>Gestr, s. of Álfgerðr Þórormsdótter, V. 13. 5.

<p>Gestr Biarnarson, II. 5. 11.

<p>Gestr enn Spake Oddleifsson, II. 21. 1; 24. 2; 26. 4: V. 15. 1: Cr. 1. 2; 5. 5; 8. 7.

<p>Gestr Þórgeirsson, II. 4. 14.

<p>Giaflaug Arnbiarnardótter, III. 11. 2.

<p>Giaflaug Ceallacsdótter, II. 9. 1; 9. 3; 16. 1: Th. 1. 1;  2. 1.

<p>Giafvaldr, courtier of King Magnús Berbeinn, II. 7. 2: Io. 4. 5.

<p>Gilla-synir, Kings of Norway, Hv. 5. 13.

<p>&ast;Gille Biaðuchsson, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Gille Iathguðsson, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Gillikristr ( = Haraldr gilli), p. 596.

<p>Gils-beckingar, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Gils Hafrsson, Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Gils Illogason, II. 7. 2: Io. 4. 5.

<p><hi>Gils Skeiðarnef</hi>, II. 17. 4&ndash;5; 18. 4; 18. 7; 29. 5.

<p>Gils Snorrason, f. of Þórðr, II. 15. 9 b; 20. 2; 23. 2: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Gísle Eyjolfsson, II. 23. 2.

<p>Gísle Finnason, of Gautland, Io. 10. 1; 12. 4; p. 592.

<p>Gísle Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

<p>Gísle Súrsson, II. 17. 4; 22. 8: Gen. A. 36: p. 319. 6.

<p>Gísle Þórbiarnarson, II. 3. 8.

<p>Gísle Þórðarson, II. 15. 7.

<p>Gísle Þórgautzson, II. 2. 3.

<p>Gísle Þórgautzson (another), II. 2. 3.

<p>Gisr&oelig;ðr, = Gizorr, Lib. 10. 1.

<p>Gitzorr, see Gizorr.

<p>Gizorr Einarsson, Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Gizorr Glaðe Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1.

<p>Gizorr Hafr-Biarnarson í Seltiarnarnese, V. 16. 12.

<p>Gizorr Hallzson L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, II. 20. 8; 23. 2: III. 14. 19: IV. 3. 7; 14. 4; V. 15. 2: Gen. B. 15: Hv. pr. 2; 3. 7; 5. 3; 5. 6: Þorl. 7. 4; 12. 2; 12. 7; 13. 1; 14. 2&ndash;3: Pol. 2. 3; 4. 3; 7. 2; 7. 5<corr sic=":">;</corr> 15. 2<corr sic=":">;</corr> Gm. 608.

<p>Gizorr Hvíte Teitzson, I. 11. 1: V. 7. 8; 14. 5: Gen. A. 14; B. 6&ndash;7; 15: Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 7. 1; 9. 1: p. 305. 9: Cr. 1. 2; 4. 3; 5. 2; 6. 2; 8. 1; 10. 1: Hv. 1. 1: Io. 1. 2.

<p>Gizorr Ísleifsson, bishop [II. 23. 2?] III. 4. 1: IV. 11. 8: V. 13. 3; 14. 5: Gen. B. 4: Mant. 1. 1&ndash;2; 1. 5; 3. 2; 5. 1: Lib. pr. 2; 9. 2; 10. 1, etc.: Cr. 10. 1, etc.: Hv. 1. 2; 2. 1, etc.; 4. 6: Pol. 14. 6: Io. 3. 3; 4. 5; 6. 1, etc.: pp. 596, 630.

<p>Gizorr Kaðalsson, p. 312. 9.

<p>Gizorr, f. of Teitr í H&aolig;fða, V. 12. 4.

<p>Gizorr iarl Þórvallzson, II. 22. 6: III. 14. 19: IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 15.

<p>Gliomal, King of the Irish, II. 14. 4.

<p>Gliro-Halle Sigurðarson, III. 22. 1: IV. 1. 2.

<p>Gl&oelig;ðer, h. of Gróa Helgadótter, IV. 16. 2.

<p>Glúmr, = Vígaglúmr, p. 312. 3.

<p>Glúmr Geirason, II. 17. 4: III. 10. 2; 21. 3.

<p>Glúmr Hildesson, Gen. A. 21.

<p>Glúmr Óleifsson Hialta, Gen. A. 18.

<p>Glúmr Þórarensson of Vatnlausa, I. 6. 5; 10. 4.

<p>Glúmr Þórgilsson, Thorv. 5.

<p>Glúmr Þórkelsson, I. 6. 5; 10. 4.

<p>Glúmr, f. of Þórbi&aolig;rg Colbrún, II. 20. 8.

<p><hi>Gnúpa-Bárðr Heyjangs-Biarnarson</hi>, III. 17. 1&ndash;2; 21<corr sic=",">.</corr> 1: IV. 15. 5: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Gnúpr Birningsson, I. 6. 6.

<p>Gnúpr Flókason, I. 9. 6.

<p>Gnúpr Grímkelsson, I. 6. 6.

<p>Gnúpr Molda-Gnúpsson, IV. 17. 3&ndash;4: V. 9. 8.

<p>Gó, sister of Górr and Nórr, IV. 12. 1.

<p>Goðbrandr Goðleifsson, II. 5. 10.

<p>Goðbrandr Kúla, II. 29. 1: III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Goðbrandr Þórsteinsson Ingimundarsonar, III. 5. 13.

<p>Goðbi&aolig;rg Ófeigsdótter Burlu-fótar, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5 (Óleifsdótter).

<p>Goðdæler, V. 17. 4.

<p>Goðine, = Earl Godwin, Hv. 1. 12.

<p>Goðine enn Góðe, Io. 1. 4: p. 631.

<p>Goðiscolcr, foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

<p>Goðlaug Eyjolfsdótter, II. 23. 2.

<p>Goðlaug Gunnarsdótter, Gen. A. 11.

<p>Goðlaug Helgadótter, III. 23. 2.

<p>Goðlaug Hrólfsdótter, III. 15. 10; 16. 1.

<pb id=pb657 n=647><p>Goðlaug Óttarsdótter, p. 640. 43.

<p>Goðlaug, w. of Vestmarr í Reykjardal, III. 18. 3.

<p>Goðlaugr enn Auðge Þórmóðarson, I. 9. 1; II. 5. 7.

<p>Goðlaugr, b. of Gils Skeiðar-nef, II. 29. 5.

<p>Goðlaugr Loftzson, V. 16. 10.

<p>Goðlaugr Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 8; 15. 10; 20. 2: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Goðleif Ketilsdótter Smiðjo-drums, II. 11. 7.

<p>Goðleifr Arason, II. 19. 3: V. 4. 6: Gen. A. 38: Cr. 4. 4.

<p>Goðleifr Goðlaugsson, II. 5. 8.

<p>Goðleifr prestr, III. 6. 4.

<p>Goðleifr Surtzson, II. 5. 10.

<p>Goðmundr Ámundason, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Goðmundr Bialfason, abbot of Ver, Þorl. 10. 3: Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Goðmundr Brandzson, priest, II. 23. 2: Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 4. 10.

<p>Goðmundr Coðransson, Hv. 4. 10.

<p>Goðmundr enn Dýre, Gm. 608.

<p>Goðmundr gáse Þórsteinsson, p. 641. 45.

<p>Goðmundr enn Góðe Arason, bishop of Hólar, III. 15. 8: Pol. 6. 3; 7. 3; 12. 1: p. 592: Gm. 606&ndash;15.

<p>Goðmundr Goll-Þóresson, II. 17. 5.

<p>Goðmundr Grímsson, pp. 600, 601.

<p>Goðmundr Gríss Ámundason, II. 22. 6.

<p>Goðmundr Hamalsson, I. 3. 10.

<p>Goðmundr at Helgafell, Cl. 633.

<p>Goðmundr Ketilsson, Hv. 5. 13.

<p>Goðmundr Óláfsson, the priest, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Goðmundr enn Ríke Eyjolfsson, III. 4. 1; 6. 6; 7. 1; 15. 8: Gen. A. 26; 32; B. 15: Lib. 306. 1: Cr. 6. 3: 7. 1.

<p>Goðmundr Snorrason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Goðmundr S&aolig;lmundarson í Ásbiarnar-nese, II. 15. 96: III. 6. 6: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Goðmundr Þórðarson, Gm. 612&ndash;14.

<p>Goðmundr Þórgeirsson L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, Lib. 10. 88.

<p>Goðmundr, s. of Steinunn, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Goðmundr Þórsteinsson, p. 639. 5.

<p>Goðný B&aolig;ðvarsdótter, w. of Hvamm-Sturla, IV. 14. 4: p. 639. 2: 640. 29, etc.

<p>Goðný Brynjolfsdótter, IV. 3. 8.

<p>Goðný Hafþórsdótter, II. 4. 14.

<p>Goðný Hrafnkelsdóttir, I. 4. 4.

<p>Goðný Þórolfsdótter, II. 7. 8: Th. 8. 3.

<p>Goðríðr Brynjolfsdótter ens Gamla, IV. 3. 7.

<p>Goðríðr Illogadótter ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

<p>Goðríðr Mársdótter, II. 8. 5.

<p>Goðríðr Narfadótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Goðríðr Þórbiarnardótter, II. 15. 4.

<p>Goðríðr Þórkelsdótter ens Svarta, III<corr sic=",">.</corr> 18. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Goðríðr Þórsteinsdótter Síðo-Hallzsonar, IV. 14. 4.

<p>Goðr&oelig;ðr Biarnarson, Lib. 8. 4.

<p>Goðr&oelig;ðr Hálfdanarson, king, II. 14. 1: Lib. pr. 2: p. 306. 12.

<p>Goðr&oelig;ðr Lióme, Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Goðrún, d. of Álof, p. 642. 40.

<p>Goðrún Ámundadótter, IV. 12. 3.

<p>Goðrún Ásolfsdótter, II. 21. 1.

<p>Goðrún Biarnadótter, p. 640. 40.

<p>Goðrún (Brandzdótter), I. 7. 8: V. 7. 6.

<p>Goðrún Colbeinsdótter Flosasonar, V. 9. 1.

<p>Goðrún Colbeinsdótter Sighvatzsonar, IV. 16. 1.

<p>Goðrún Goðmundardótter, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Goðrún Halldórsdótter Snorrasonar, III. 6. 4.

<p>Goðrún, w. of Heðinn at Heðinsh&aolig;fða, III. 18. 2.

<p>Goðrún Ingigerðardótter, p. 640. 9.

<p>Goðrún, d. of Iórunn Hialtadótter, V. 9. 6.

<p>Goðrún Ketilsdótter, III. 18. 1.

<p>Goðrún Klyppsdótter, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Goðrún Liótzdótter, Gen. B. 10; 15.

<p>Goðrún Óspaksdótter, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Goðrún Ósvífsdótter, II. 9. 3; 15. 8; 18. 4; 20. 7; 21. 2: III. 21. 8: Gen. A. 36; B. 3.

<p>Goðrún Sigmundardótter, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Goðrún Snælaugardótter, Od. 3. 2.

<p>Goðrún Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Goðrún Snorradótter Halldórssonar, p. 641. 23: 642. 6.

<p>Goðrún Þórarensdótter Sælings, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Goðrún Þórðardótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Goðrún Þóresdótter Skegg-Broddasonar, IV. 3. 1: V. 9. 1.

<p>Goðrún Þórkelsdótter Þrastarsonar, II. 30. 3.

<p>Goðrún Þóroddzdótter, Pol. 10. 1.

<p>Goðrún Þórsteinsdótter Ranglátz, Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 3. 5, etc.

<p>Goðrún Þórsteinsdótter Svarfaðar, III<corr>.</corr> 14. 5.

<p>Goðþormr Ragason, I. 9. 4.

<p>Goll-Þórer Oddzson Skrauta, II. 17<corr>.</corr> 5.

<p>G&aolig;ngo-Hrólfr R&aolig;gnvaldzson Mæra-iarls, first Duke of Normandy, II. 9. 3: V. 14. 1&ndash;2 (G&aolig;ngo-Hrólfr Yxna-Þóresson, <pb id=pb658 n=658>Gen. B. 3, most likely the same man).

<p>Gormr enn gamle, King of Denmark, I. 1. 1.

<p>Gormr, a Swedish nobleman, III. 9. 1.

<p>Górr, b. of Nórr, IV. 12. 1.

<p>Gote Alfarensson, II. 7. 3.

<p>Gothormr Finnolfsson, priest, Hv. 1. 8<corr sic=":">;</corr> 2. 3.

<p>Gothormr, King of Norway, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>G&aolig;to-skeggjar, II. 14. 5.

<p>Grane of Grana-staðir, II. 4. 10.

<p>Grane Gunnarsson, V. 7. 8.

<p>Grane Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

<p><hi>Graut-Atle Þóresson Þiðranda</hi>, IV. 3. 1; 3. 3; 4. 1&ndash;3; 5. 4: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 28.

<p>Gregorius VII, Pope, Lib. 10. 11; 10. 12: Hv. 2. 4; 2. 18; 3. 10: Io. 6. 1.

<p>&ast;Grel&aolig;d, d. of Biartmar iarl, II. 22. 2.

<p>Grel&aolig;d, w. of Þórfinnr Hausa-kliúfr, II. 14. 2.

<p><hi>Grenjaðr Hermundarson Holkins</hi>, II. 30. 3.

<p><hi>Grenjaðr Hrappsson</hi>, III. 19. 1; 19. 4&ndash;5: Cr. 1. 3.

<p>Grettir Onundarson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Grettir enn Sterke Ásmundarson, II. 29. 1: III. 1. 2; 20. 2: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Gríma Hallkelsdótter, II. 2. 1; 6. 5.

<p>Grímarr Grímsson, II. 4. 9.

<p>Grímkell Goðe Biarnarson, I. 6. 6; 9. 1.

<p><hi>Grímkell Ulfsson Kráko</hi>, II. 7. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Grímolfr of Grímolfsstaðir, II. 4. 9.

<p>Grímolfr af Ogðom, II. 28. 5 (?): III. 14. 10; 20. 1: V. 16. 6 (?).

<p>Grímolfr Óláfsson Becks, III. 12. 6.

<p>Grímolfr Óláfsson Iafna-collz í Unaðs-dale, II. 25. 2; 26. 5.

<p>Grímr Ásgrímsson, Gen. A. 13.

<p>Grímr Camban, I. 6. 8: III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Grímr Droplaugarson, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Grímr Eyrarleggr Gunnsteinsson, III. 14. 20.

<p>Grímr Geitskor, Lib. 2. 3.

<p>Grímr Glamaðr, p. 640. 17, 23.

<p>Grímr Gráfeldar-múle, III. 18. 1.

<p>Grímr Grímolfsson, II. 4. 9: III. 20. 1.

<p>Grímr of Grímsdal, a freedman of Skalla-Grímr, II. 3. 12; 4. 2.

<p><hi>Grímr of Grímsgil</hi>, I. 10. 6.

<p><hi>Grímr í Gríms-nese</hi>, II. 21. 1: IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1&ndash;2: Gen. A. 15.

<p>Grímr, f. of Hallbera, III. 2. 3.

<p><hi>Grímr enn Háleyske Þóresson</hi>, I<corr>.</corr> 8. 1: II. 3. 1: III. 5. 1&ndash;2: V. 15. 4.

<p>Grímr Helgason á  Kálfskinne, III. 14. 11.

<p>Grímr herser ór Sogne, see Veðrar-Grímr.

<p>Grímr Hialdzson, Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Grímr Hialtason, monk, Gm. 607, 612&ndash;13.

<p>Grímr Holta-Skalle Þórsteinsson, V. 7. 6.

<p>Grímr Hrafnsson, V. 12. 4.

<p>Grímr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p><hi>Grímr Ingiallzson</hi>, II. 5. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Grímr Ingiallzson Grimssonar, p. 640. 17, 24.

<p>Grímr Ioansson, I. 7. 4.

<p>Grímr K&aolig;gor, II. 24. 2.

<p>Grímr Kolbiarnarson herser, III. 13. 2&ndash;3; 15. 1&ndash;2; 15. 4.

<p>Grímr Loðin-kinne Ketilsson, II. 22. 2: III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Grímr Loðmundarson (= f. of Svertingr, III. 15. 5 ?), II. 23. 2: Gen. 1 (?).

<p>Grímr Oddason, p. 642. 10, 22.

<p>Grímr, f. of Svertingr, III. 15. 5 (= Grímr Loðmundarson ?).

<p>Grímr Svertingsson of Mosfell, II. 4. 1: V. 9. 8; 16. 3: Mant. 5. 5: Lib. 8. 3.

<p>Grímr Tófoson (s. of Þórarinn Þórbiarnarson), V. 12. 1.

<p>Grímr Þórgeirsson, II. 5. 14.

<p>Griót-ár-menn, Nj. 367.

<p>Griótgarðr Háleygja-iarl, V. 5. 1; 9. 7: Gen. A. 33 (? = Griótgarðr iarl í Sóknardale).

<p>Griótgarðr Hlaða-iarl, I. 7. 7: II. 23. 2; 24. 1; 24. 6: III. 14. 17; 16. 5: IV. 3. 1: V. 11. 2; 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

<p>Griótgarðr iarl í Sóknar-dale, Gen. A. 32 (= Griótgarðr Háleygja-iarl ?).

<p>Gríss Gledill, III. 14. 5.

<p>Gríss of Grísartunga, II. 4. 2.

<p>Gríss Liótzson, III. 20. 4;  22. 1.

<p>Gríss Sæmingsson, III. 5. 16.

<p>Gróa Biarnardótter Byrðusmiors, III. 11. 5.

<p>Gróa en Cristna Geirleifsdótter, II. 21. 2: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Gróa Dala-Collzdótter, II. 15. 9.

<p>Gróa Gizorardótter byscops, Hv. 2. 13; 2. 19: pp. 599, 601.

<p>Gróa Hafþórsdótter, III. 14. 5.

<p>Gróa Helgadótter, IV. 16. 2.

<p>Gróa Herfinnzdótter, III. 9. 1.

<p>Gróa Oddsdótter, II. 4. 13.

<p>Gróa Síðo-Hallzdótter, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Gróa en Skygna, III. 12. 2.

<pb id=pb659 n=659><p>Gróa Þórðardótter Illoga, IV. 14. 4; 14. 10.

<p>Gróa Þórólfsdótter Brækis, II. 22. 5.

<p>Gróa Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 14. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Gróa Þórvarðardótter frá Urðom, III. 12. 8.

<p>Guðlaugr Ásbiarnarson, IV. 15. 3 [S].

<p>Guðlaugr enn Auðge, see Goðlaugr.

<p>Gunnarr Baugsson, V. 4. 4; 5. 2; 7. 1&ndash;2: Gen. 5.

<p>Gunnarr Hámundarson frá  Hlíðarenda, IV. 7. 2; 18. 1: V. 4. 4; 5. 2; 7. 2; 7. 7&ndash;8; 8. 6: Gen. 5&ndash;6; 11.

<p>Gunnar Hlifarson, I. 10. 3: II. 15. 14: IV. 17. 4: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Gunnarr, sister&apos;s son of Hróarr Tungo-Goðe, IV. 7. 2.

<p>Gunnarr Nautatík, Od. 3. 1.

<p>Gunnarr enn Spake Ulfheðinsson, Lib. 9. 3; 9. 6; 10. 7: Cr. 10. 7.

<p>Gunnarr Ulfliótzson, III. 15. 7: Gen. B. 16: Lib. 2. 2.

<p>Gunnarr Valbrandzson, II. 24. 8.

<p>Gunnarr Þórsteinsson Tjaldstæðings, V. 8. 6.

<p>Gunnarr, b. of Þórvaldr Croppin-skegge, Lib. 3. 2.

<p>Gunnbi&aolig;rn Brynjolfsson ens Gamla, IV. 3. 5.

<p>&ast;Gunnbi&aolig;rn Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

<p>Gunnbi&aolig;rn Gandr, II. 3. 9.

<p>Gunnbi&aolig;rn Ulfsson Kráko, II. 7. 1; 12. 2; 26. 1.

<p>Gunnfríðr Þórolfsdótter, Th. 8. 3.

<p>Gunnhildr, w. of Kale, I. 10. 4.

<p>Gunnhildr Ásláksdótter, II. 6. 4; 11. 7; 13. 1.

<p>Gunnhildr Eiríksdótter or Goðd&aolig;lom, III. 6. 3; 8. 1.

<p>Gunnhildr Ísr&oelig;ðordótter, IV. 2. 3.

<p>Gunnhildr konungamóðir, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Gunnhildr Ormsdótter, Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Gunnhildr Simonardótter, II. 6. 4.

<p>Gunnhildr Þórsteinsdótter, p. 641. 1.

<p>Gunnlaugr Hrólfsson, I. 8. 1.

<p>Gunnlaugr munkr, Thorv.  5; 7: pp. 592&ndash;3; 414.

<p>Gunnlaugr Ormstunga enn Gamle, Hrómundarson, I. 6. 4: II. 2. 1; 3. 1.

<p>Gunnlaugr Ormstunga Illogason, III. 2. 3.

<p>Gunnlaugr Steinþórsson, II. 8. 1: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Gunnlaugr Þórbiarnarson, II. 7. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Gunnlaugr Þóresson á Skalmarnese, Gen. B. 5.

<p><hi>Gunnolfr Croppa Þóresson Hauknefs</hi>, IV. 1. 1.

<p><hi>Gunnolfr enn Gamle Þórbiarnarson</hi>, III. 12. 8.

<p><hi>Gunnolfr i Hvamme</hi>, III. 8. 11.

<p>Gunnsteinn Berserkja-bane B&aolig;lverksson, V. 9. 7: Gen. A. 10.

<p>Gunnsteinn Eysteinsson, III. 14. 20.

<p><hi>Gunnsteinn Gunnbiarnarson</hi>, II. 26. 1.

<p>Gunnsteinn á Gunnsteins-st&aolig;ðom, III. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Gunnsteinn Hallzson, Gen. B. 20.

<p>Gunnsteinn, f. of Þóra, II. 22. 5; (Þóríðr), 26. 5.

<p>Gunnsteinn Þóresson Líno, IV. 8. 3.

<p>Gunnvaldr Rauða-Biarnarson, II. 4. 5.

<p>Gunnv&aolig;r Goðþormsdótter, I. 9. 4.

<p>Gunnv&aolig;r Hroðgeirsdótter, V. 11. 5.

<p>Guthormr Sigurðarson, I. 8. 1.

<p>Gyða, w. of Ingialdr enn Tryggve, III. 15. 2.

<p>Gyrðr iarl Sigvaldason, II. 5. 8.

<p>Gyrðr, grandf. of Skialgr á Iaðre, III. 12. 7.

<p>Gyríð, w. of Kolbein, Gm. 607.



<div3 id=ixH>
<head>H</head>


<p>Hafgrímr í Hafgrímsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

<p>Hafliðe Mársson, II. 23. 2: III. 6. 3: Gen. B. 10; 13: Mant. 1. 3; 1. 6&ndash;7: Lib. 10. 9: Cr. 10. 7; 10. 10: Hv. 2. 18; 3. 13: pp. 598&ndash;601.

<p>Hafliðe enn Orve Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

<p>Hafliðe Þórgestzson, II. 11. 8.

<p>Hafliðe Þórvallzson, abbot, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Haf-Liótr Þórbergsson, IV. 5. 4.

<p><hi>Hafnar-Ormr</hi>, I. 7. 2; 7. 11&ndash;13; 8. 3: V. 11. 5.

<p>Hafr enn Auðge Þórkelsson, Gen. A. 33.

<p>Hafr Brandzson, Gm. 608, 611.

<p>Hafr Hámundarson, V. 7. 2.

<p>Hafr Svertingsson, Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Hafr Þórðarson Knapps, III. 12. 1.

<p>Hafr-Bi&aolig;rn Molda-Gnúpsson, I. 10. 3: IV. 17. 2&ndash;4: Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Hafr-Bi&aolig;rn Styrkársson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Hafþóra Þórbergsdótter, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4.

<p>Hafþórr Víkingr, III. 14. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Hagný Hakadótter, Mant. 276.

<p>Halþórr Þórgeirsson, II. 4. 14.

<p>Hake, a thrall of Ketilbi&aolig;rn Gamle, V. 14. 4.

<p>Hake Hámundarson, king, Mant. 276.

<p>Hákon Aðalsteins-fóstri, King of Norway, I. 7. 11: III. 17. 2: Gen. B. 3.

<p>Hákon galinn, b. of King Ingi, Pol. 13. 1.

<p><hi>Hákon á Hákonar-st&aolig;ðom</hi>, IV. 3. 5.

<p>Hákon iarl Griótgarðzson, II. 24. 6; 25. <pb id=pb660 n=660>1; 26. 6: III. 14. 17; 16. 5: IV. 3. 1: V. 11. 2; 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

<p>Hákon Herðibreiðr, King of Norway, Hv. 5. 13.

<p>Hákon Magnússon, King of Norway, Hv. 2. 20.

<p>Hákon iarl enn Ríke, Sigurðarson, IV. 14. 1: Mant. 3. 1: Cr. 8. 12: p. 417.

<p>Hákon Sverresson, King of Norway, Pol. 7. 3; 15. 2: Gm. 613, 615.

<p>Háleygja-ætt, IV. 11. 5.

<p>Háleygr, King of Hálogaland, Gen. A. 32.

<p>Háleygr Ski&aolig;ldolfsson, IV. 11. 5.

<p>Hálfdan Fróðason, Gen. A. 1.

<p>Hálfdan enn Gamle, IV. 14. 1.

<p>Hálfdan Hvítbeinn Oleifsson, King of the Uplanders, II. 14. 1: Lib. pr. 2; p. 306. 11.

<p>Hálfdan enn Milde, Lib. pr. 2.

<p>Hálfdan Sigurðarson, Lib. 9. 1.

<p>Hálfdan enn Snialle, Gen. A. 1.

<p>Hálfdan Svarte Goðr&oelig;ðarson, King  of the Uplanders, V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2: Lib. pr. 2; 1. 1.

<p>Hálfr konungr Hi&aolig;rleifsson, II. 17. 1: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 274.

<p>Hálfsreckar, II. 17. 1: Gen. A. 25.

<p>Halla Eyjolfsdótter, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

<p>Halla Flosadótter, p. 640. 8, 22.

<p>Halla Gestzdótter Oddleifssonar, II. 15. 11; 21. 1.

<p>Halla Grettisdótter, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Halla Heðinsdótter, II. 28. 1: III. 9. 1.

<p>Halla I&aolig;rundardótter Hals, III. 6. 6.

<p>Halla I&aolig;rundardótter frá Keldom, IV. 3. 1: Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 3, 5.

<p>Halla Lýtingsdótter, IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28.

<p>Halla Pólsdótter, Pol. 1. 8; 9. 2; 10. 1.

<p>Halla Steinolfsdótter, II. 23. 3.

<p>Halla Steinunnardótter, p. 639. 12.

<p>Halla  Þórhallzdótter (al. Steinsdótter), mother of St. Thorlac, V. 3. 2: Þorl. 2. 1; 6. 5.

<p>Halla Þórkelsdótter, II. 20. 8.

<p>Hallaðr iarl R&aolig;gnvallzson, II. 20. 2: IV. 14. 2.

<p>Hallbera Aradótter, Gen. B. 11.

<p>Hallbera Broddadótter, Gen. B. 8; see Hallv&aolig;r Oddadótter.

<p>Hallbera Grímsdótter, III. 2. 3.

<p>Hallbera Hróallzdótter ens Rauða, Gen. A. 4.

<p>Hallbera Ingigerðardótter, abbess, p. 640. 9, 22.

<p>Hallbera Onundardótter, III. 19. 5.

<p>Hallbera Rafnsdótter, III. 19. 5: p. 641. 44.

<p>Hallbera Snorradótter Goða, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Hallbera Snorradótter Magnússon, p. 641. 12, 24, etc.; 642. 6, etc.

<p>Hallbera Snorradótter Þórðarsonar, II. 23. 2.

<p>Hallbera Ulfsdótter, I. 8. 1.

<p>Hallbera Þórgilsdótter, p. 641. 34.

<p>Hallbera, w. of Þórgils Húnbogason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Hallbera Þóroddzdótter Hialms, III. 7. 1: Gen. A. 32: p. 642. 4.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rg, d. of Arnóra, p. 641. 19.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rg Bárðardótter, II. 15. 8.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rn Egilsson, IV. 2. 2.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rn, f. of Eyjolfr, II. 18. 1.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rn Half-troll, V. 4. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rn H&aolig;rða-kappe, V. 10. 6.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rn Ioansson Loptzsonar, Od. 2. 2.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rn Oddzson of Kiðja-berg, I. 10. 3: II. 26. 2&ndash;3: V. 15. 2.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rn Oddzson Þórormssonar, III. 4. 1.

<p>Hallbi&aolig;rn enn sterke, Gen. A. 29.

<p>Halldís Erpsdótter, II. 15. 7; 15. 11.

<p>Halldís Narfadótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Halldís Þórgrímsdótter Harðrefssonar, II. 23. 2; 24. 1.

<p>Halldóra Brandzdótter, Od. 2. 1.

<p>Halldóra Einarsdótter, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Halldóra Eyjolfsdótter, Hv. 5. 1.

<p>Halldóra Geirmundardótter, I. 6. 4.

<p>Halldóra Gunnsteinsdótter, III. 14. 20.

<p>Halldóra Hialtadótter, V. 15. 2.

<p>Halldóra Hrólfsdótter, I. 11. 1: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Halldóra Ormsdótter Aurga, V. 3. 7.

<p>Halldóra Refsdótter, I. 6. 8.

<p>Halldóra Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Halldóra Steinmóðsdótter, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1.

<p>Halldóra Þórhallzdótter, II. 15. 10.

<p>Halldóra Þórkelsdótter ens Svarta, III. 17. 2.

<p>&ast;Halldor, a thrall of Hi&aolig;rleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 4.

<p>Halldórr Arnliótzson, III. 14. 19.

<p>Halldórr Bersason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Halldórr Brandzson, II. 13. 1.

<p>Halldórr Collsson, III. 2. 3.

<p><corr sic="Haldórr">Halldórr</corr> Egilsson, Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Halldórr or Forsár-skógom, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Halldórr Garpsdals-goðe Heðinsson, II. 18. 4.

<p>Halldórr Goðmundar, son ens Ríka, Cr. 6. 3; 6 B&ast;; 7. 1.

<pb id=pb661 n=661><p><hi>Halldórr Gunnbiarnarson</hi>, II. 26. 1.

<p>Halldórr Hallvarðzson, priest, Gm. 606.

<p>Halldórr H&aolig;gnason, I. 7. 8.

<p>Halldórr á Holms-látre Þórleifsson, II. II. 7; 13. 1.

<p>Halldórr Illogason, I. 7. 6.

<p>Halldórr Óleifsson Pá, II. 15. 9: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Halldórr Ornolfsson, IV. 18. 6.

<p>Halldórr  Snorrason  Goða, II. 20. 2: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 13: pp. 641. 23; 642. 5.

<p>Halldórr Þóresson, II. 29. 3.

<p>Halldórr Þórgeirsson frá Hofe, III. 7. 1; 11. 2.

<p>Halle enn Hvíte, III. 15. 8.

<p>Halle Ormsson, III. 15. 8.

<p>Halle enn Sterke Onundarson, Gen. A. 12.

<p>Hallfríðr Egilsdótter, IV. 2. 2.

<p>Hallfríðr Einarsdótter, p. 642. 5.

<p>Hallfríðr Snorradótter, Lib. 305. 18: Hv. 3. 1.

<p>Hallfríðr Þórbiarnardótter frá Vatne, II. 15. 8&ndash;9; 20. 7 (al. Biarnardótter or Biarnar-firðe).

<p>Hallfríðr, w. of Tanne, Ch. 630.

<p>Hallfr&oelig;ðr Vandræða-skáld Óttarsson, III. 5. 16: Cr. 6. 3; 7. 2.

<p>&ast;<hi>Hallgeirr í Hallgeirsey</hi>, V. 4. 7; 7. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Hallgeirr Þórgeirsson, IV. 3, 4.

<p>Hallgerðr Hólmsteinsdótter, IV. 5. 2.

<p>Hallgerðr H&aolig;scullzdótter Snuin-bróc (Lang-bróc), II. 15. 8&ndash;9; 26. 3: Gen. A. 35.

<p>Hallgerðr Narfadótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Hallgerðr Ornolfsdótter, II. 20. 9.

<p>Hallgerðr Tungo-Oddzdótter, I. 10. 3: II. 26. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Hallgerðr Vermundardótter ens Mióva, II. 23. 2.

<p>Hallgerðr Þórolfsdótter, I. 6. 5.

<p>Hallgils Þórbrannzson, III. 20. 5.

<p>Hallgrímr  Brynjolfsson ens Gamla, IV. 3. 5.

<p>Hallgrímr Sviðbalke Bárðarson, V. 3. 7.

<p>Hallgrímr Valbrannzson, II. 24. 8.

<p>Hallkatla Biarnardótter, II. 21. 1.

<p>Hallkatla Einarsdótter, p. 640. 18.

<p>Hallkatla Rafnsdótter, p. 639. 3.

<p>Hallkatla Þiðrandadótter, Gen. A. 19; B. 15.

<p>Hallkell Hallkelsson, V. 15. 2.

<p>Hallkell í Hólom, b. of Ketilbi&aolig;rn enn Gamle, II. 26. 3: V. 15. 2: Gen. A. 15.

<p><hi>Hallkell Hrosskelsson of Hallkelsstaðir</hi>, I. 7. 10: II. 2. 1; 6. 4; 13. 1.

<p>Hallkell Oddzson, V. 15. 2.

<p>Hallormr á Cárns-á, III. 5. 10.

<p>Hallr Biarnason, V. 15. 2.

<p>Hallr, f. of Finnr L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, IV. 5. 4.

<p>Hallr Geirolfsson, III. 18. 4.

<p>Hallr Gizorarson, II. 20. 8: Pol. 2. 1; 7. 2.

<p>Hallr Goðmundarson, II. 15. 9<hi>b</hi>: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Hallr, f. of Gunnsteinn, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Hallr í Hauka-dale Þórarensson, V. 13. 4: Lib. 9. 2; 10. 10: Cr. 4. 3: Io. 3. 3.

<p>Hallr á Hofst&aolig;ðom, II. 17. 5.

<p>Hallr Mió-d&oeacute;lingr Bárðarson, III. 12. 3.

<p>Hallr Ór&oeacute;kioson, Lib. 3. 2.

<p>Hallr Rafnsson, abbot, III. 19. 5: Þorl. 15. 2.

<p>Hallr af Síðo, see Síðo-Hallr.

<p>Hallr Styrmesson, III. 7. 4: Gen. B. 11.

<p>Hallr Teitsson Ísleifssonar, III. 14. 19: IV. 3. 7; 14. 4: Gen. B. 10; 15: Lib. 9. 2: Cr. 10. 8; 10. 10: Hv. 3. 7; 4. 10; 5. 1: pp. 598&ndash;601.

<p>Hallr Víga-Styrsson, II. 15. 8.

<p><hi>Hallr Þóresson</hi>, I. 4. 4.

<p>Hallsteinn Atlason ens Mióva, V. II. 2; see Hásteinn.

<p>Hallsteinn á Framnese, V. II. 3.

<p>Hallsteinn Gnúpsson á Hialla, V. 9. 8.

<p>Hallsteinn Hestr, III. 15. 2; 15. 4.

<p>Hallsteinn Þengilsson, III. 16. 2.

<p>Hallsteinn Þórbiarnarson Digra, II. 7. 5&ndash;6.

<p><hi>Hallsteinn Þorskafiarðar goðe Þórolfsson Mostrar-skeggs</hi>, II. 10. 5; 15. 12; 20. 1: Th. 3. 2; 6. 1&ndash;2; 7. 5: Lib. 4. 2.

<p>Hallvarðr Hallkelsson, V. 15. 2: Mant. I.  2.

<p>Hallvarðr Harðfare, I. 8. 1: V. 4. 1.

<p>Hallvarðr enn Helge, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Hallvarðr, f. of Márr, II. 15. 14: Th. 11. 4.

<p>Hallvarðr, f. of Oddr, V. 12. 3.

<p><hi>Hallvarðr Súgande</hi>, II. 24. 3; 24. 6.

<p>Hallveig Biarnardótter, V. 7. 6.

<p>Hallveig Einarsdótter, II. 6. 4: p. 642. 16.

<p>Hallveig Fróðadóttir, I. 3. 10.

<p>Hallveig Oddzdótter, II. 20. 2.

<p>Hallveig Tinnzdótter, II. 13. 1.

<p>Hallveig Þórbiarnardótter, I. 6. 6.

<p>Hallveig Þórgrímsdótter, II. 15. 10.

<p>Hallveig Þórviðardótter, V. 10. 5; 12. 1.

<p>Hallv&aolig;r Oddadótter, II. 17. 6: Gen. B. 8 (Hallbera Broddadótter). = <!-- refers to next entry. -->

<p>Hallv&aolig;r Þórhallzdótter, II. 20. 6.

<p>Hals Þóresson, III. 17. 2.

<pb id=pb662 n=662><p>Hamall Sigurðarson, I. 3. 10.

<p>Hamall Þórmóðsson, I. 3. 10: III. 6. 6.

<p>Hamar-byggjar, II. 3. 6.

<p>Hámundr Gunnarsson Baugssonar, IV. 7. 2; 18. 1: V. 4. 4; 5. 2; 7. 2; 7. 7; 8. 6: Gen. 5. 11.

<p>Hámundr Gunnarsson frá Hlíðarenda, V. 7. 8.

<p>Hámundr enn Halte Hróarsson Tungo-Goða, IV. 7. 2 ; 18. 1&ndash;2: Gen. 5.

<p><hi>Hámundr Heljarskinn Hi&aolig;rsson</hi>, II. 17. 2; 22. 2: III. 14. 1&ndash;2; 14. 8&ndash;11; 15. 6; 15. 9: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 274&ndash;7.

<p>Hámundr Tyrfingsson í Goðd&aolig;lom, V. 11. 4.

<p>Haraldr Egða-konungr, Mant. 5. 3.

<p>Haraldr Gille, King of Norway, Hv. 4. 3; 4. 11&ndash;12: Þorl. 1. 1.

<p>Haraldr Goðinason, King of England, Hv. 1. 12.

<p>Haraldr Goðr&oelig;ðarson, Lib. 8. 4.

<p>Haraldr Goll-skeggr, King of Sogn, III. 6. 1: V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Haraldr Gormsson, King of Denmark, Cr. 3. 1: Thorv. 2.

<p>Haraldr Gráfeldr, King of Norway, Mant. 3. 1.

<p>Haraldr enn Harðráðe Sigurðarson, King of Norway, Mant. 1. 1; 3. 2; 5. 4: Lib. 9. 1; 9. 4: Hv. 1. 9; 1. 11&ndash;12; 2. 2; 2. 14; 2. 16: Io. 1. 1; 4. 5: p. 596.

<p>Haraldr enn Hárfagri, King of Norway, I. 1. 1; 3. 6; 4. 5; 8. 1: II. 4. 1; 4. 3; 5. 9; 9. 1; 10. 1 ; 17. 3; 22. 1&ndash;2; 23. 1; 24. 3; 27. 1; 28. 1; 28. 4; 29. 1; 30. 1: III. 5. 2; 15. 2; 15. 4: IV. 2. 1; 7. 1; 14. 1&ndash;3: V. 1. 1; 3. 4; 4. 1; 8. 2; 9. 1; 11. 1&ndash;2; 12. 5; 15. 1; 16. 4&ndash;5: Gen. B. 5: Th. 1. 2&ndash;3; 2. 1&ndash;2; 3. 2: Mant. 5. 2; 5. 5: p. 275: Lib. pr. 2; 1. 1&ndash;4; 3. 4; 7. 1; 8. 4; 9. 1.

<p>Haraldr Hildet&aolig;nn, King of the Danes, V. 3. 1: Gen. A. 1; B. 16.

<p><hi>Haraldr Hringr</hi>, III. 3. 1.

<p>Haraldr iarl í Orkneyjom, Pol. 1. 4; 15. 2.

<p>Haraldr Unge Halfdanarson, King of Sogn, V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Haraldr Víkingr, III. 12. 7.

<p>Harðrefr Ingiallzson, II. 23. 2&ndash;3; 24. 1.

<p>Hardvig, archbishop in Magdeburg, Hv. 2. 4: Io. 6. 1.

<p>Hárekr Hildiríðarson, V. 4. 1.

<p>Hárekr Upplendinga-iarl, III. 12. 4.

<p>Harre Helgason, III. 4. 2.

<p>Há-Snorre Oddzson, II. 29. 3.

<p><hi>Hásteinn Atlason</hi>, I. 3. 2; V. 11. 2&ndash;3; 12. 2;  17. 2.

<p>Hásteinn Hrómundarson, II. 30. 3&ndash;4: III. 5. 16.

<p>Haugud&apos;, see Hoggvandill.

<p>Haukr, berserk, Cr. 2. 1: Thorv. 5.

<p>Haukr Egilsson, Gen. A. 12.

<p>Haukr Erlendzson, l&aolig;gmaðr, V. 17. 1: Mant. 5. 1: p. 639. 13, 15.

<p>Haukr Hábrók, Th. 2. 2.

<p>Haukr at Hauk-st&aolig;ðom, III. 6. 3.

<p>Haukr Ketilsson, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Hávarðr i Fellsmúla Þóresson Leðr-hals, III. 17. 2.

<p>Hávarðr Griótgarðzson, V. 5. 1.

<p>Hávarðr enn Halte, II. 18. 2; 24. 2; 24. 8.

<p>Hávarðr Hegre í Hegranese, III. 8. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Hávarr Cleppsson (al. Einarsson Clepps&shy;sonar), I. 7. 3: II. 15. 11: Gen. B. 12.

<p>Healte, see Hialte.

<p>Heðinn, f. of Arndís, III. 9. 1.

<p>Heðinn Arnmóðsson, III. 3. 1.

<p>Heðinn Gilsson Skeiðar-nefs, II. 18. 4.

<p>Heðinn, f. of Halla, III. 9. 1.

<p><hi>Heðinn at Heðins-h&aolig;fða Þórsteinsson Þurs</hi>, III. 6. 6; 18. 2.

<p>Heðinn enn Milde Þórbiarnarson, III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4; 2. 7.

<p>Heðinn or Miolu, III. 14. 20.

<p>Heðinn í Sóknadal, III. 15. 2.

<p>Heðinn Þórfinnzson, IV. 3. 3.

<p>Heggr Þóresson, V. 16. 7.

<p>Heiðr volva, III. 5. 1.

<p>Heimer iarl í Hlymd&aolig;lom, Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Heimlaug Þórarensdótter, V. 10. 6.

<p>Heinrekr, foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1&ndash;2: Lib. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Heinrekr Conraðsson, emperor, Hv. 1. 3.

<p>Heinrekr, King of England, Hv. 4. 12: Þorl. 15. 1.

<p>Helga Árnadótter, I. 7. 5.

<p>Helga Arnardottir, I. 3. 1&ndash;2, 4.

<p>Helga Ásgeirsdótter, V. 3. 2.

<p>Helga Biarnadótter, p. 640. 41.

<p>Helga Biólfsdótter, IV. 10. 1.

<p>Helga Ceallacsdótter, II. 8. 1; 9. 4: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Helga Einarsdótter, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Helga Erlingsdótter Knýtis, III. 13. 2.

<p>Helga Helgadótter H&oeacute;ngssonar, V. 4. 3; 4. 7.

<p>Helga Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 15. 8&ndash;9; Gen. A. 32: Lib. 305. 21.

<p>Helga, w. of Herjolfr and Brynjolfr, IV. 5. 2.

<pb id=pb663 n=663><p>Helga Holmsteinsdótter, IV. 5. 2.

<p>Helga Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs, V. 7. 9 (see Helga Þórsteinsdótter Rauðnefs).

<p>Helga Iónsdótter, V. 16. 2.

<p>Helga Ketilsdótter prests, p. 641. 22, etc.

<p>Helga Óleifsdótter Feilans, II. 15. 14: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Helga Onundardótter Bílds, V. 7. 5.

<p>Helga Onundardótter, sister of Skáld-Hrafn, II. 6. 4.

<p>Helga Ormsdótter, V. 12. 3.

<p>Helga Steingrímsdótter, p. 639. 14.

<p>Helga Steinolfsdótter, Gen. B. 9.

<p>Helga Steinsdótter, II. 8. 5.

<p>Helga Vémundardótter, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Helga Þórðardótter Magnússonar, pp. 639. 2; 640. 29; 641. 6.

<p>Helga Þórðardótter Narfasonar, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Helga Þórðardótter Skeggja, I. 4. 3: III. 8. 1: V. 14. 1: Gen. A. 13&ndash;14; B. 7.

<p>Helga Þóresdótter Þórkelssonar, II. 30. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Helga Þórgeirsdótter frá Fiske-l&oeacute;k, III. 15. 11; 20. 2.

<p>Helga Þórgeirsdótter frá Odda, V. 7. 5; 8. 7.

<p>Helga Þórgeirsdótter frá Víðe-mýre, II. 4. 5.

<p>Helga Þórláksdótter, II. 1. 6.

<p>Helga Þóroddzdótter, p. 640. 23.

<p>Helga Þórsteinsdótter Rauðnefs, V. 7. 10; 9. 4 (see Helga Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs).

<p>Helga Þróndardótter Mioksiglanda, V. 12. 5.

<p>Helge Ásbiarnarson, IV. 6. 3: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Helge Ásgeirsson, II. 3. 4.

<p>Helge Ásgeirsson Grímssonar, V. 12. 4.

<p>Helge Biarnarson Buno, I. 4. 1: IV. 14. 10: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Helge Biartmársson, II. 22. 3.

<p><hi>Helge Biolan Ketilsson</hi>, I. 4. 5; 5. 1; 6. 4: II. 14. 6: V. 17. 2; 17. 5: Th. 1. 1; 5. 1: p. 327. 15: Cr. 3. 5: Thorv. 7.

<p>Helge Blá-fauskr Hrafnsson, V. 3. 1.

<p>Helge Bun-hauss, IV. 3. 7.

<p>Helge Droplaugarson, Gen. A. 19; B. 15.

<p>Helge Dýr Skefilsson, V. 12. 4.

<p>Helge Eyjolfsson, II. 23. 2.

<p><hi>Helge Eyvindarson enn Magre</hi>, II. 14. 1; 18. 7; 19. 1; 20. 8; 23. 2; 26. 2: III. 13. 2&ndash;3; 14. 1&ndash;5; 14. 8; 14. 10&ndash;11; 14. 13; 14. 19; 15. 4&ndash;12; 16. 2; 18. 2; 20. 1: V. 17. 2; 17. 5: Gen. A. 25; 32; B. 16: Th. 1. 4: Mant. 275: Lib. 2. 1; 305. 20.

<p>Helge Gr&oelig;nlendinga-byscop, Mant. 6. 1.

<p>Helge Hallzson, I. 4. 4.

<p>Helge Hámundarson, V. 7. 2.

<p>Helge Helgason Biarnarsonar Buno, IV. 14. 10; 15. 1: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Helge Hestr, III. 19. 5.

<p><hi>Helge Heyangrs-Biarnarson</hi>, IV. 15. 4.

<p>Helge H&aolig;gnason, II. 3. 2.

<p>Helge H&oeacute;ngsson, V. 4. 3; 4. 7; 7. 3.

<p>Helge H&aolig;scullzson, II. 15. 9.

<p>Helge Hrogn Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1.

<p>Helge Hrogn Ketilsson, V. 7. 10; 9. 4.

<p><hi>Helge Hrólfsson or Gnúpofelle</hi>, II. 24. 6.

<p>Helge Hrólfsson, í Hofg&aolig;rðom, II. 5. 11.

<p>Helge af Hvanneyre, II. 7. 2.

<p>Helge, f. of Ióra, II. 21. 1.

<p>Helge Ketilsson ens Auðga, V. 3. 6.

<p>Helge of Lundr, II. 3. 8.

<p>Helge Narfason, III. 14. 11.

<p>Helge Óleifsson, Norwegian king, II. 14. 1: Gen A. 35&ndash;36: Th. 1. 4:  Lib. 306. 12.

<p>Helge Ósvífsson, Gen. B. 3.

<p>Helge Óttarsson, II. 9. 3; 21. 2: Gen. B. 3: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Helge Rauða-Biarnarson, II. 4. 5.

<p>Helge Skarfr (al. Skrápr) Geirleifsson, I. 6. 8: II. 21. 1.

<p>Helge Skaptason, Hv. 5. 13.

<p>Helge enn Svarte, V. 4. 5.

<p>Helge Trauste Óláfsson, V. 12. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Helge Valþiófsson, III. 15. 10.

<p>Helge Vestarsson, IV. 16. 2.

<p>Helge Vésteinsson, II. 23. 1.

<p>Helge Þórsteinsson, III. 4. 1.

<p>Helge Þórvallzson, III. 4. 2.

<p>Helgo-Steinarr Þórarensson, II. 17. 4: III. 21. 3.

<p><hi>Hella-Bi&aolig;rn</hi>, see <hi>Skialda-Bi&aolig;rn</hi>.

<p>Hellisfirðingar, IV. 10. 4.

<p>Helliss-menn, I. 10. 2: II. 2. 2.

<p>Hello-Narfe Ásbrannzson, III. 14. 10&ndash;11.

<p>Herdís Bolladótter Bollasonar, II. 21. 2: Gen. B. 14.

<p>Herdís Bolladótter Þórleikssonar, II. 15. 8.

<p>Herdís Coðransdótter, p. 641. 36.

<p>Herdís H&aolig;fða-Þórðardótter, III. 6. 6; 11. 2: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Herdís Hrafnsdótter, pp. 639. 12; 640. 19.

<p>Herdís Ketilsdótter, Pol. 1. 3; 1. 8; 2. 4; 4. 5; 6. 3; 9. 2; 10. 1; 10. 3; p. 641. 4.

<p>Herdís, m. of Steinn the poet, II. 9. 3.

<p>Herdís Sveinbiarnardótter, II. 20. 8.

<pb id=pb664 n=664><p>Herdis Tinnzdótter, II. 23. 2.

<p>Herfiðr Gilsson Skeiðar-nefs, II. 18. 7.

<p>Herfiðr Þórgilsson, f. of Skialda-Bi&aolig;rn, II. 28. 1; III. 9. 1.

<p>Hergils Hnapp-raz Þróndarson, II. 17. 4; 18. 6; 19. 1; 21. 6.

<p>Hergrímr Þórgilsson, III. 9. 1.

<p>Herjolfr, kinsman of Ingolfr  Arnarson, II. 2. 7: V. 16. 11.

<p>Herjolfr, one of Flóke&apos;s followers, I. 2. 3.

<p>Herjolfr Bárðarson of Herjolfsnes, II. 12. 7; 12. 9: V. 16. 11.

<p><hi>Herjolfr Bárðarson i Vestmannaeyjum</hi>, V. 3. 7.

<p><hi>Herjolfr í Breiðdal</hi>, IV. 11. 3.

<p><hi>Herjolfr í Breiðdal Þórgeirsson</hi>, III. 14. 10.

<p>Herjolfr Eyvindarson Ellz, II. 15. 10: Gen. A. 35.

<p>Herjolfr H&oeacute;ngsson, V. 4. 6&ndash;7.

<p>Herjolfr Hornabriótr, V. 2. 1.

<p>Herjolfr enn Hvíte, Gen. A. 25.

<p><hi>Herjolfr Sigurðarson</hi> (<hi>Holkin-raze</hi>), II. 7. 7&ndash;8: Th. 8. 3.

<p>Herjolfr Þóresson at Mývatne, III. 17. 2.

<p><hi>Herjolfr Þórgeirsson i Heyd&aolig;lom</hi>, IV. 5. 1&ndash;3; 11. 4.

<p>Herlaugr Kveld-Ulfsson, V. 16. 9.

<p>Hermundr Coðransson, Gen. B. 14: Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Hermundr Eyvindarson S&oelig;rkves, III. 5. 8; 5. 16.

<p>Hermundr Holkinn (al. Hokinn), II. 30. 3.

<p>Hermundr Illogason ens Svarta, III. 2. 3: Gen. B. 14: Cr. 1. 5; 8. 7: p. 641. 11.

<p>Hermundr á Mýre, I. 26. 4.

<p>Herríðr Gautzdótter, II. 17. 6.

<p>Herr&oelig;ðr iarl á Gautlande, Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Herr&oelig;ðr, f. of Svana, II. 8. 1.

<p>Herr&oelig;ðr Hvika-timbr (al. Hvítaský), II. 28. 4.

<p>Hersteinn Atlason, I. 3. 2: V. 11. 2.

<p>Hersteinn Blund-Cetilsson, II. 15. 14: (Þorkelsson) Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Herv&aolig;r, w. of Veðrar-Grímr, I. 4. 1: Gen. A. 32 (here called his mother).

<p>Herþrúðr Illogadótter ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

<p>Herþrúðr Þórmóðsdótter, II. 6. 4.

<p>Hesta-Geller, II. 30. 3.

<p>Heyjangrs-Bi&aolig;rn Helgason, herser, III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 1; 15. 4&ndash;5: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Hialdr Vatnarsson konungs, Mant. 5. 4.

<p>Hiallcar, a freedman of Án Rauðfeldr, II. 22. 4.

<p>Hialmgerðr, m. of Ásgeirr Rauðfeldr and B&aolig;ðmóðr Gerper, III. 14. 10.

<p><hi>Hialmolfr i Bl&aolig;ndo-hlíð</hi>, III. 8. 4.

<p>Hialmon-Gautr, III. 16. 1.

<p>Hialmr Ásbjarnarson, Gm. 608.

<p>Hialp, wife of &OElig;rlygr Hrappsson, I. 6. 4.

<p>Hialtasyner, III. 10. 1&ndash;2; 11. 5: V. 17. 4 (cf. Þórðr and Þórvaldr).

<p><hi>Hialte i Breiðdal</hi>, IV. 11. 2.

<p>Hialte enn Hugprúðe, III. 2. 2.

<p>Hialte prestr, Io. 12. 2.

<p>Hialte Skeggjason, I. 11. 1: V. 9. 6; 9. 12; 13. 4: Gen. B. 7: Lib. 7. 1, etc.: Cr. 1. 2; 4. 3; 6. 1, etc.; 7. 1; 8. 1, etc.: Hv. 1. 1.

<p><hi>Hialte Þórðarson Skapls</hi>, III. 9. 2; 10. 1&ndash;2; 20. 3.

<p>Hialte Þórðarson, b. of Þórbi&aolig;rn Ongull, III. 11. 2 <hi>n</hi>.

<p>Hialte Þórkelsson, II. 15. 7.

<p>Hilder Eysteinsson, IV. 16. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Hilder enn Gamle Geirleifsson, Gen. A. 21.

<p>Hilder Helgason, IV. 15. 4.

<p>&ast;<hi>Hilder or Hildis-ey</hi>, V. 4. 7; 7. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Hilder Parrak, IV. 16. 4.

<p>Hildiglúmr Rúnolfsson, Gen. A. 17.

<p>Hildigunnr Beinisdótter, II. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Hildigunnr Starkaðardótter Þórðarsonar, Gen. A. 25: Nj. 364. 4; 365. 4; 367. 17.

<p>Hildigunnr Starkaðardótter, lækner, Gen. A. 4.

<p>Hildigunnr Þórsteinsdótter Titlings, Gen. A. 4.

<p>Hildiríðar-synir, I. 8. 1: V. 4. 1 (see Hárekr and Hr&oelig;rekr).

<p>Hildr, a nun, Io. 12. 2.

<p>Hildr Ásbiarnardótter, IV. 16. 1.

<p>Hildr Baugsdótter, V. 7. 1.

<p>Hildr Hermundardótter, III. 5. 16.

<p>Hildr, sister of Ketill Þistill, III. 22. 2.

<p>Hildr en Mióva H&aolig;gnadótter, II. 17. 1.

<p>Hildr Ormarsdóttir, I. 4. 4 (see Hildr Ulfarsdótter).

<p>Hildr Skeggjadótter, V. 2. 2.

<p>Hildr Stiarna Þórvallzdótter, II. 3. 4.

<p>Hildr Ulfarsdótter (= Hildr Ormarsdótter, I. 4. 4): V. 10. 3; 10. 5.

<p>Hildr Þóresdótter, IV. 16. 1.

<p>Hildr Þórsteinsdótter ens Rauða, Gen. B. 12 = Þórhildr Þórsteinsd.

<p>Hildr Þráinsdótter Svarta-þurs, III<corr>.</corr> 14. 5.

<p>Hior, see Hi&aolig;rr.

<p>Hi&aolig;rleifr Einarsson, see Hrolleifr Einarsson.

<pb id=pb665 n=665><p>Hi&aolig;rleifr Goðe Skoftason, II. 5. 6.

<p>Hi&aolig;rleifr H&aolig;rða-konungr enn Kvensame Hi&aolig;rsson, II. 17. 1: Gen. A. 25. 38; B. 12: Mant. 274.

<p><hi>Hi&aolig;rleifr Hroðmarsson</hi>, I. 3. 1&ndash;7: IV. 18. 6.

<p>Hi&aolig;rr, f. of Fleinn the poet, V. 2. 1.

<p>Hi&aolig;rr Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

<p>Hi&aolig;rr konungr Hálfsson, II. 17. 1&ndash;2: III. 14. 11: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 274, 276.

<p>Hi&aolig;rtr Hámundarson, V. 7. 2; 7. 7: Gen. 5.

<p>Hlenne Ásmundarson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Hlenne enn Gamle Ormsson, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31: Cr. 1. 3; 8. 7.

<p>Hlíf, m. of Gunnarr, II. 15. 14.

<p>Hlíf Heðinsdótter, III. 14. 19.

<p>Hlíf Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 15. 11.

<p>Hlíf Hesta-gellder, II. 5. 9.

<p>Hlíf Hrólfsdótter, III. 13. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Hlíf Torf-Einarsdótter, Gen. B. 7.

<p>Hloðver Hloðversson (Louis II), Roman emperor, I. 1. 1.

<p>Hnake Ásbiarnarson ens Auðga, II. 15. 1.

<p>Hnappfellingar, IV. 15. 3.

<p>Hof-Colle, see <hi>Colle Hróallzson</hi>.

<p><hi>H&aolig;fþa-Þórðr Biarnarson Byrða-smi&aolig;rs</hi>, II. 15. 14: III. 5. 12; 6. 6; 7. 1; 9. 2; 11. 1&ndash;3; 11. 5: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 2. 2.

<p>Hofsfellingar, IV. 14. 6.

<p>Hofsmenn, III. 5. 12.

<p>H&aolig;gne Geirþiófsson, II. 22. 5.

<p>H&aolig;gne Halldórsson, II. 3. 2.

<p>H&aolig;gne enn Hvíte Óblauðsson, II. 17. 1: 19. 1; 20. 2; 21. 1; 27. 1: Gen. A. 38 (Ótryggsson), Gen. B. 12 (id.).

<p>H&aolig;gne Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3; 5. 13; 5. 16.

<p>H&aolig;gne í Niarðey, II. 17. 1.

<p>H&aolig;gne Þórmóðarson, Od. 3. 1; 4. 3.

<p>Hoggvandill (?) Gunnarsson, II. 15. 14 (Haugud&apos;, MS.).

<p>Holbarke, see Þórvaldr Holbarke Ísr&oeacute;ðarson.

<p>Holmfastr Véþormsson, IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1.

<p>Holmg&aolig;ngo-Berse Véleifsson, II. 4. 3.

<p>Holmg&aolig;ngo-Hrafn, II. 12. 1.

<p><hi>Holmg&aolig;ngo-Máne</hi>, III. 6. 5.

<p>Holmg&aolig;ngo-Starre Eiríksson, III. 6. 3; 8. 1.

<p>Holmkell Alfvarensson, II. 7. 3.

<p>Holms-menn, the outlaws in Geirshólme, I. 9. 1; 10. 2.

<p>Holm-Starre = Starre Þórgestz son of Holm.

<p>Holmsteinn Atlason, I. 3. 2: V. 11. 2.

<p>Holmsteinn Bersason, IV. 5. 2.

<p>Holmsteinn, s. of Helga Holmsteinsdótter, IV. 5. 2.

<p>Holmsteinn Snæbiarnarson, II. 26. 2.

<p>Holta-þórer Þórgeirsson, V. 3. 3; Gen. A. 8&ndash;9; 11&ndash;12; 20.

<p><hi>Holte á Holta-st&aolig;ðom</hi>, III. 6. 4.

<p>H&oelig;ngr, see <hi>Ketill H&oelig;ngr</hi>.

<p>H&oeacute;nsa-þórer, II. 2. 5: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>H&aolig;rða-Káre Ásláksson Bifrakára, I. 3. 2: III. 11. 5: IV. 13. 1: Gen. B. 15&ndash;16: Lib. 2. 2.

<p>H&aolig;rðr Grímkelsson, I. 6. 6; 9. 1; 10. 5.

<p>H&aolig;rðr í H&aolig;rða-dal, II. 15. 3&ndash;4: III. 2. 3.

<p>Hornfirðingar, IV. 14. 5.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Alfvarensson, II. 7. 3.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Arason, Gm. 612.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Atlason, II. 22. 5.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Bollason, II. 15. 8.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Dala-Collsson, II. 15. 8&ndash;10; 20. 7: III. 11. 2: Gen. A. 35.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr enn Hvíte Ingiallzson, Gen. A. 10.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Iæknir, II. 23. 2.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Nialsson, Gen. A. 10.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1: p. 380. 9.

<p><hi>H&aolig;sculldr Þórsteinsson Þurs</hi>, III. 18. 2.

<p>H&aolig;sculldr Þráinsson, Nj. 364&ndash;7.

<p>Hrafn Dýrason, II. 23. 1.

<p>Hrafn Eyvindarson, IV. 10. 2.

<p><hi>Hrafn Hafnar-lykill</hi>, IV. 18. 4.

<p><hi>Hrafn enn Heimske Valgarzson</hi>, V. 3. 1; 6. 1; 17. 2: Gen. 1.

<p>Hrafn Hlymreks-fare Oddzson, II. 15. 14; 18. 1; 19. 2: Gen. B. 9.

<p>Hrafn H&oelig;ngsson, V. 4. 2; 4. 7; 6. 2; 8. 7; 17. 4: Gen. A. 5; 18: Lib. 3. 4.

<p>Hrafn í Hrafnsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

<p>Hrafn, f. of Hrafnkell, IV. 6. 1.

<p>Hrafn Oddsson, herra, see Rafn.

<p>Hrafn Skefilsson, V. 12. 4.

<p>Hrafn Sveinbiarnarson, II. 20. 8; 22. 5: Gm. 610, 612&ndash;5: p. 640. 18.

<p>Hrafn Ulfheðinsson, Hv. 4. 12: p. 641. 43.

<p>Hrafn Þórviðarson, V. 11. 5;  12. 2.

<p>Hrafna-Flóke, see Flóke Vilgerðarson.

<p>Hrafnhildr Ketilsdótter H&oelig;ngs, V. 4. 1.

<p>Hrafnhildr Stórolfsdótter, V. 4. 4; 7. 2: Gen. 5.

<p>Hrafnkell Goðe Þóresson, IV. 6. 3: V. 17. 1: Gen. A. 30.

<p><hi>Hrafnkell Hrafnsson</hi>, IV. 6. 1&ndash;3: Gen. A. 30 (Hrafnkell Raumr).

<p>Hrafse Liótolfsson, II. 16. 2.

<pb id=pb666 n=666><p>Hrane (= Hrane Grímsson?), II. 3. 5.

<p>Hrane Grímsson, I. 10. 6.

<p>Hrane Hildesson, IV. 16. 4.

<p>Hrappr Biarnarson Buno, I. 4. 1&ndash;2; 6. 1: Gen. A. 13&ndash;14; B. 7: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Hrappr Eysteinsson Meinfrets, II. 15. 11: III. 1. 1.

<p>Hrappr, f. of Geirleifr, III. 14. 14; 19. 5.

<p>Hrappr Hallgeirsson á Forsvelle, IV. 3. 4.

<p>Hrappr Helgason, I. 5. 1.

<p>Hrappr, f. of Hroðgeirr enn Hvíte, IV. 1. 3.

<p>Hrappr, f. of Sumarliðe, II. 15. 7.

<p>Hraundæler, II. 4. 13.

<p>Hrefna Ásgeirsdótter, II. 15. 9; 29. 1: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Hreiðarr, f. of Ulfr Kráka, II. 6. 5.

<p>Hreiðarr, thrall of Laugarbrecko-Einarr, II. 6. 2.

<p>Hreinn Hermundarson, Gen. B. 14: Od. 3. 2: p. 641. 11.

<p>Hreinn Styrmesson, abbot, Hv. 5. 13: Io. 12. 5: pp. 593; 641. 11.

<p>Hrifla (= Rifla Þórsteinsson?), II. 3. 4.

<p>Hríseyjar-Narfe Þróndarson, III. 12. 7.

<p><hi>Hróalldr Biolan</hi>, IV. 2. 3.

<p>Hróalldr, f. of Colle, II. 4. 15;  20. 7.

<p>Hróalldr Eiríksson, III. 8. 1.

<p>Hróalldr Eiríksson Orðigskeggja, Gen. A. 28; 33 = Geirmundr Eiríkson Orðigskeggja, III. 8. 1.

<p>Hróalldr Geirmundarson, III. 8. 1 = Geirmundr Hróallzson, Gen. A. 28.

<p>Hróalldr or Haddingja-dal, II. 5. 1: V. 11. 4.

<p>Hróalldr H&aolig;scullzson, III. 18. 2.

<p>Hróalldr Hrollaugsson Hryks, Gen. A. 32.

<p>Hróalldr Hrollaugsson R&aolig;gnvallzsonar, IV. 14. 4.

<p>Hróalldr Hrómundarson, I. 3. 1.

<p>Hróalldr Loðmundarson, IV. 19. 3.

<p>Hróalldr Oddbiarnarson, V. 4. 3.

<p>Hróalldr enn Rauðe, Gen. A. 4.

<p>Hróalldr Ryggr Ásleiksson, III. 11. 1 (= Hrollaugr Hrykkr, Gen. A. 32).

<p>Hróaldr Ulfsson, I. 11. 2  (but cf. II. 17. 6).

<p>Hróarr (al. Þórbergr), f. of Áslákr í Langadal, II. 13. 1.

<p>Hróarr H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 1.

<p>Hróarr Horn Brunason, IV. 18. 7.

<p>Hróarr Unason Tungo-Goðe, I. 2. 2: IV. 7. 2&ndash;3; 18. 1&ndash;2: Gen. 5.

<p>Hróarr, see also Róarr.

<p><hi>Hroðgeirr enn Hvíte Hrappsson</hi>, IV. 1. 3; 3. 1.

<p>&ast;<hi>Hroðgeirr enn Spake</hi>, I. 7. 12: V. 11. 5.

<p>Hroðgeirr Þórsteinsson, V. 11. 5.

<p>Hroðlaugr, see Hrollaugr.

<p>Hroðmarr Hróallzson, I. 3. 1.

<p>Hróðný H&aolig;scullzdótter, Gen. A. 10.

<p><corr sic="Hróðny">Hróðný</corr> Illogadótter, II. 21. 1.

<p>Hróðný Ketilsdótter Bifro, I. 3. 1.

<p>Hróðný Ketilsdótter Kappa, II. 7. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Hróðný, d. of Miðfiarðar-Skegge, II. 15. 14: III. 2. 3: Gen. A. 37.

<p>Hróðný Unadótter, III. 5. 12.

<p>Hroðolfr, a bishop, I. 7. 6: Lib. 8. 1.

<p>Hroðrekr, see Roðrekr.

<p>Hróe, s. of Arnkatla, IV. 19. 3.

<p>Hróe enn Skarpe, III. 22. 1.

<p>Hrókr enn Svarte, Mant. 275.

<p>Hrólfr frá Ám, III. 13. 1.

<p><hi>Hrólfr enn Digre Eyvindarson</hi>, II. 5. 11.

<p>Hrólfr Helgason ens Magra, of Gnúpo-fell, II. 18. 7; 24. 6: III. 14. 1.; 15. 10; 16. 1; 18. 2; 21. 1.

<p>Hrólfr Helgason, of Hofgarðar, II. 5. 11.

<p>Hrólfr herser (= Hrólfr herser af <sic>Ogðom</sic>?), I. 7. 7.

<p>Hrólfr herser af Ögðom, II. 9. 4; 17. 3; 18. 1: Gen. B. 9: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Hrólfr H&oelig;ggvande, IV. 17. 1.

<p>Hrólfr Hróallzson enn Yngre (al. Ceallacsson), of Ballará, I. 11. 2; II. 4: II. 1. 1; 17. 6; 20. 6.

<p>Hrólfr Ingiallzson, III. 13. 1.

<p>Hrólfr Ketilsson Kiólfara, I. 8. 1.

<p>Hrólfr Krake, King of Denmark, III. 2. 2.

<p>Hrólfr Móðolfsson, IV. 7. 3; 15. 6.

<p>Hrólfr Nefja, IV. 14. 1.

<p>Hrólfr enn Rauð-senzke Þórbiarnarson, II. 21. 3; 26. 4.

<p><hi>Hrólfr Rauðskeggr</hi>, III. 17. 2: V. 7. 9.

<p>Hrólfr konungr Svásason, í Berge, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16.

<p>Hrólfr Ulfsson enn Auðge of Geitland, I. 8. 2; 11. 1: II. 1. 2: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Hrollaugr Hrykkr Biarnarson Iarn-síðo, Gen. A. 32 (= Hróaldr Hryggr Ásleiksson, III. 11. 1).

<p><hi>Hrollaugr  R&aolig;gnvallzson  Mæra-iarls</hi>, IV. 12. 2; 14. 2&ndash;7; 14. 9&ndash;10: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19; B. 10: Lib. 2. 1: p. 305. 11.

<p><hi>Hrolleifr Einarsson</hi>, V. 9. 8 (Hi&aolig;rleifr); 16. 3: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Hrolleifr enn Mikle Arnallzson, III. 5. 12; 11. 3.

<p>Hrómundr Gripsson, I. 3. 1.

<p>Hrómundr enn Halte Eyvindarson <pb id=pb667 n=667>S&oelig;rkves, II. 30. 3&ndash;4: III. 5. 8; 5. 16.

<p><hi>Hrómundr Þóresson</hi>, of Þverárhlíð, II. 3.  1&ndash;2; 3. 4: III. 5. 1.

<p>Hr&oeacute;rekr, f. of Fróðe, Gen. A. 1.

<p>Hr&oeacute;rekr (al. Herrekr) Hildiríðarson, V. 4.  1.

<p>Hr&oeacute;rekr  Sl&oelig;ngvand-bauge  Harallzson, V. 3. 1: [Hálfdanarson], Gen. A. 1; B. 16.

<p>Hrossbi&aolig;rn, f. of Ásbi&aolig;rn Myrkárskalle, Gen. A. 33.

<p>Hrossbi&aolig;rn Raumsson, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p><hi>Hrosskell í Svartárdal</hi>, III. 7. 7.

<p><hi>Hrosskell Þórsteinsson of Hallkelsstadir</hi>, II. 2. 1&ndash;3: V. 17. 2.

<p>Hrútr Herjolfsson, of Kambs-nes, II. 4. 15; 15. 10: V. 6. 2: Gen. A. 35.

<p>Hrútr Tannason, II. 4. 15.

<p>Hugbertus, bishop of Canterbury, Cr. 3.1.

<p>Húnboge Þórgilsson, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 10.

<p>Hunda-Steinarr, an English earl, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>&ast;Hunde í Hundadal, II. 15. 5.

<p>Hundolfr iarl, V. II. I: Mant. 5. 2 (Húnolfr).

<p>Húngerðr Þóroddzdótter, I. 10. 3: IV. 17. 4.

<p>Húnr&oelig;ðr Véfr&oelig;ðarson, III. 6. 3: p. 641. 43.

<p>Húsvíkingar, IV. 9. 1.

<p>Hvals-eyjar-firðingar, II. 12. 10.

<p>Hvamm-Sturla, see Sturla Þórðarson.

<p>Hvammverjar, Gen. A. 20.

<p><hi>Hvamm-Þórer</hi>, 1. 6. 7.

<p><hi>Hvate á Hvata-st&aolig;ðom</hi>, III. 5. 2; 5. 5.

<p>Hvítserkr Ragnarsson Loðbrókar, Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Hyrningr Cleppiarnsson, II. 3. 7.

<p>Hyrningr Óláfsson, Gen. B. 9; 11.

<p>H&aeacute;nsa-Þórer, see H&oelig;nsa-Þórer.

<p>Hæringr Þórgrímsson Erro-beins, V. 12. 2; 12. 4.



<div3 id=ixI>
<head>I, J</head>


<p>Iarngerðr, Coðran&apos;s wife, Thorv. 1.

<p>Iarngerðr Liótzsdótter, IV. 14. 4: p. 640. 43, 45.

<p>Iarngerðr Þórarensdótter, II. 7. 1.

<p>Iarngerðr Þórðardótter, pp. 639. 9; 941. 16.

<p>Iathguðr Gillason, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Iátmundr enn Helge (St. Eadmund, King of East Anglia), Gen. A. 32.

<p>Iátvarðr, King of England, s. of Ælfred the Mighty, I. 1. 1.

<p>Iðunn  Arnardótter, see Þórunn Arnardótter.

<p>Iðunn Molda-Gnúpsdótter, I. 7. 1: IV. 17. 4.

<p>Illoge Arason, of Reykjahólar, II. 11. 7; 19. 3: Gen. B. 12.

<p>Illoge Biarnarson, priest, Io. 7. 1.

<p>Illoge Eiðsson, I. 10. 7.

<p>Illoge Fellz-goðe Eyvindarson Eikikróks, II. 5. 11 (= Þórðr Illoge).

<p>Illoge, f. of Gísl the poet, Io. 4. 5.

<p>Illoge, f. of Ingimundr the Priest, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Illoge Ingimundarson, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Illoge, s. of Iódís, II. 21. 1.

<p>Illoge Leifsson, Hv. 5. 5.

<p>Illoge enn Ramme Ásláksson, II. 11. 7; 12. 2.

<p>Illoge enn Rauðe Hrólfsson, I. 7. 6; 11. 3; 17. 6: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Illoge enn Svarte Hallkelsson, I. 6. 4; 10. 2: II. 2. 1; 2. 4; 4. 15; 15. 3: III. 2. 3: Gen. B. 14: p. 641. 10.

<p>Illoge Steinbiarnarson, II. 20. 9.

<p>Illoge Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6.

<p>Illoge Þórðarson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Illoge Þórvallzson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Inge Gillason, King of Norway, Hv. 5. 13.

<p>Inge Haraldsson, King of Norway, Pol. 13. 1.

<p>Ingialldr Alfvarensson, II. 7. 3.

<p><hi>Ingialldr Brúnason</hi>, II. 23. 3.

<p>Ingialldr Fróðason konungs, III. 13. 1: Gen. B. 12.

<p>Ingialldr Grímsson, p. 640. 17.

<p>Ingialldr Helgason, Norwegian king, II. 14. 1: Gen. A. 35&ndash;6: Th. 1. 4: Lib. 306. 12.

<p>Ingialldr Helgason ens Magra, II. 20. 8: III. 14. 1; 14. 4; 14. 10&ndash;11.

<p>Ingialldr Hergilsson, II. 17. 4: III. 21. 3.

<p>Ingialldr H&aolig;scullzson at Keldom, Gen. A. 10.

<p>Ingialldr Hróallzson, II. 5. 1: V. 11. 4.

<p>Ingialldr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

<p>Ingialldr enn Illráðe, Lib. 306. 10.

<p>Ingialldr, f. of Skegg-Avallde, III. 5. 16.

<p>Ingialldr enn Sterke Geirfinnzson, Gen. A. 10.

<p>Ingialldr enn Tryggve Kolbiarnarson Sneypis, III. 13. 2; 15. 2.

<p>Ingialldr Þórgilsson, II. 4. 15.

<p>Ingialldr Þórkelsson H&aeacute;yjartyrðils, Gen. A. 24.

<p>Ingibi&aolig;rg Arnardótter, III. 20. 2.

<pb id=pb668 n=668><p>Ingibi&aolig;rg Ásbiarnardótter, II. 2. 4; 15. 3: III. 2. 3.

<p>Ingibi&aolig;rg <corr sic="Ástríðardotter">Ástríðardótter</corr>, p. 642. 40.

<p>Ingibi&aolig;rg Gilsdótter Skeiðar-nefs, II. 17. 5.

<p>Ingibi&aolig;rg Hávarzdótter, V. 5. 1.

<p>Ingibi&aolig;rg Hroðgeirsdótter, IV. 1. 3; 3. 1.

<p>Ingibi&aolig;rg Rauðsdótter Ruggo, III. 9. 4.

<p>Ingigerðr Philippusdótter, Gen. B. 10: p. 640. 9, 21.

<p>Ingigerðr, w. of King Burizlaf, III. 9. 1.

<p>Ingileif Ásbiarnardótter, IV. 5. 4: Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Ingimundr Einarsson, Cr. 10. 8.

<p><hi>Ingimundr enn Gamle Þórsteinsson</hi>, III. 4. 1; 5. 1&ndash;3; 5. 9&ndash;12; 7. 1: V. 17. 2; 17. 4: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Ingimundr Grímsson, Gm. 611.

<p>Ingimundr Hafrsson, Thorv. 6.

<p>Ingimundr  Illogason, the priest, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Ingiríðr Ceartansdótter, III. 6. 4.

<p>Ingiríðr Þórvallzdótter, p. 642. 40.

<p><hi>Ingolfr Arnarson</hi>, I. 3. 1&ndash;10; 4. 3&ndash;4; 5. 1; 6. 8; 8. 1: II. 12. 7: V. 15. 2; 16. 9; 16. 11&ndash;12; 17. 2; 17. 4: Gen. B. 10: Th. 3. 3: Lib. 1. 2; 3. 1;  10. 12.

<p>Ingolfr enn Fagre Þórsteinsson, III. 5. 13.

<p><hi>Ingolfr Herr&oelig;ðarson</hi>, II. 28. 4&ndash;5.

<p><hi>Ingolfr enn Sterke Anason á Holmsláttre</hi>, II. 12. 4; 13. 1.

<p>Ingolfr enn Sterke Þórolfsson Sparrar, II. 21. 4.

<p>Inguðr Þórsteinsdótter, II. 6. 5.

<p>Ingunn Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 14. 1; 15. 9: Gen. A. 25.

<p>Ingunn, w. of Ketill H&oelig;ngr, V. 4. 2.

<p>Ingunn Þóresdótter, Gen. A. 25.

<p>Ingunn Þórolfsdótter Véleifssonar, II. 15. 8: III. 21. 3.

<p>Ioan, see also Jón.

<p>Ioan, archbishop of Trondhjem, Hv. 5. 13: Ch. 637.

<p>Ioan Arnason, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Ioan, bishop of Greenland, Mant. 6. 1: Pol. 7. 1.

<p>Ioan Gizorarson, Hv. 2. 19.

<p>Ioan enn Írske, bishop, Lib. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 11 (enn Saxneske): Mant. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Ioan Ketilsson, Pol. 10. 1.

<p>Ioan Loftzson, Gen. B. 15: Hv. 5. 9: Þorl. 7. 4: Pol. 1. 1; 2. 3; 4. 3; 6.  1; 14. 7; 15. 2: Od. 2. 1; 6. 1.   (See also Jón.)

<p>Ioan  Ogmundarson enn Helge, I. 5. 1: IV. 14. 4: V. 3. 2; 9. 10; 11. 6: Gen. B. 10;  15: Mant. 1. 5&ndash;6: Lib. 9. 1; 10. 11; 305. 13: Cr. 10. 2; 10. 7: Hv. 1. 7<hi>b</hi>; 2. 9; 3. 5; 3. 13: Pol. 15. 2: Io. 1. 1; 3. 2; 6. 3: pp. 592, 596: Gm. 613.

<p>Ioan Sigmundarson, Hv. 5. 13: Gm. 606.

<p>Ioan Þórgeirsson, I. 7. 4.

<p>Ioan Þórvarðzson, priest, Cr. 10. 8.

<p>Iódís Illogadótter ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

<p>Iódís Oddzdótter, pp. 641. 1, 7; 642. 37, 42.

<p>Iódís Snartardótter, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9 (Védís).

<p>Iódís Þórarensdótter, II. 21. 1.

<p>Iófríðr Bárðardótter, I. 7. 5.

<p>Iófríðr Gunnarsdótter, I. 10. 3: II. 15. 14: IV. 17. 4: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Iófríðr Tungu-Oddzdótter, I. 10. 3: II. 5. 4.

<p>Johannes VIII, Pope in Rome, I. 1. 1.

<p>I&aolig;kull Bárðarson, III. 5. 13.

<p>I&aolig;kull Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3; 5. 12&ndash;13: pp. 319. 14; 322. 18; 323. 1.

<p>I&aolig;kull Ingimundarson iarls, III.  5. 1; 5. 13.

<p><hi>Iólgeirr á Iólgeirs-st&aolig;ðom</hi>, V. 4. 3; 9. 8&ndash;9.

<p>Jón, see also Ioan.

<p>Jón í Áse, Sigurðarson, p. 640. 13.

<p>Jón, f. of Helga, V. 16. 2.

<p>Jón klerkr, Ch. 638.

<p>Jón Korpr Rafnsson, p. 639. 3.

<p>Jón Loptzson,  II. 22. 6:  V. 11. 6: p. 640. 12.

<p>Jón Petrsson, p. 639. 4.

<p>Jon á Reyrvelle, s. of Ulfr Stallare, II. 9. 3.

<p>Jón Svarte, p. 593.

<p>Ióra Harradótter, III. 4. 2.

<p>Ióra Helgadótter, II. 21. 1.

<p>Ióreiðr, m. of Are enn Fróðe, IV. 14. 4<hi>n</hi>.

<p>Ióreiðr Hallzdótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Ióreiðr Olvesdótter, II. 2. 1.

<p>Ióreiðr Tinnzdótter, II. 6. 4.

<p>Ióreiðr Þiðrandadótter,  IV. 12. 2; 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 15.

<p>I&aolig;rundr, Lib. 306. 7.

<p>I&aolig;rundr, archbishop, Ch. 638.

<p>I&aolig;rundr Ásgeirsson Cneifar, V. 3. 2.

<p>I&aolig;rundr Atlason, II. 12. 1; 19. 5; 20. 2; 23. 2.

<p>I&aolig;rundr enn Cristne Cetilsson, I. 7. 3: V. 17. 5.

<p>I&aolig;rundr Goðe Hrafnsson ens Heimska, V. 3. 1; 4. 7; 6. 1&ndash;2; 17. 4: Gen. I: Cr. 6. 1.

<pb id=pb669 n=669><p><hi>I&aolig;rundr Háls Þóresson Þegjanda</hi>, III. 5. 2; 5. 3; 6. 6.

<p>I&aolig;rundr af Hitárnese, Ch. 631.

<p>I&aolig;rundr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>I&aolig;rundr frá Keldom, IV. 3. 1.

<p>I&aolig;rundr í  Miðenge, Þórgilsson Grímssonar, II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

<p>I&aolig;rundr í Skora-dal, II. 11. 7.

<p>I&aolig;rundr, f. of Skúle, II. 7. 2.

<p>I&aolig;rundr, b. of Sleito-Helge, II. 30. 4.

<p>I&aolig;rundr Ulfsson ens Skiálga, II. 19. 4.

<p>I&aolig;rundr Þórfinnzson, Gen. B. 13.

<p>I&aolig;rundr Þórgilsson Collssonar, II. 20. 2.

<p>Iórunn Einarsdótter of Stafaholt, II. 7. 2.

<p>Iórunn Einarsdótter Halldórssonar, III. 14. 19: IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 10 (Ióreiðr); 15.

<p>Iórunn, step-daughter of Gnúpr Molda-Gnúpsson, IV. 17. 4.

<p>Iórunn Helgadótter, wife of Tungo-Oddr, I. 10. 3.

<p>Iórunn Helgodótter, m. of Haukr Erlendsson, p. 639. 14.

<p>Iórunn Hialtadótter Skeggjasonar, V. 9. 6.

<p>Iórunn Ingimundardótter ens Gamla, III. 4. 1; 5. 3: Gen B. 5.

<p>Iórunn Mannvitz-brecka Ketilsdótter Flatnefs, IV. 16. 1: Th. 1. 1.

<p>Iórunn en Óborna Ósvallzdótter, Gen. A.  32.

<p>Iórunn Olvesdótter Barnakarls, V. 13. 4.

<p>Iórunn Svertingsdótter, V. 9. 8.

<p>Iórunn Teitzdótter Ketilbiarnarsonar, Gen. A. 13.

<p>Iórunn Þórgnýsdótter L&aolig;gmannz, III. 16. 1.

<p>Iórunn Þórmóðardótter, I. 11. 3.

<p>Iórunn Þórsteinsdótter Tiald-st&oeacute;ðings, V. 8. 6.

<p>Iórunn Þórvallzdótter Holbarka, III. 11. 2.

<p>Iósteinn Þórgeirsson, I. 7. 8.

<p>Iósteinn Þórsteinsson Tiald-st&oeacute;ðings, V. 8. 6.

<p>Iotun-bi&aolig;rn, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Ísfirðingar, II. 26. 1.

<p>Ísgerðr Goðbrannzdótter Kúlo, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Ísgerðr Hunda-Steinarsdótter, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Ísgerðr Þórmóðsdótter, I. 6. 4.

<p>Ísgerðr Þórsteinsdótter, II. 21. 1.

<p>Ísleifr Gizorarson, bishop of Iceland, V. 14. 5: Gen. A. 14; B. 4. 15: Mant. 3. 2; 5. 1: Lib. pr. 2; 1. 1; 9. 1; 10. 1: Cr. 10. 1&ndash;3: Hv. 1. 2, etc.: Io. 1. 2; 3. 1, etc.; 6. 1: p. 595.

<p>Ísleifr Grímsson, p. 593.

<p>Ísleifr Hallzson, p. 593.

<p><hi>Ísleifr of Ísleifsstaðir</hi>, II. 3. 3.

<p>Ísleifr Ísr&oelig;ðarson, III. 6. 4.

<p>Ísolfr Biólfsson, IV. 10. 1.

<p>Ísolfr at Búlande, IV. 18. 3.

<p>Ísr&oelig;ðr Holltason, III. 6. 4.

<p>Ísr&oelig;ðr Hróallzson, IV. 2. 3.

<p><hi>Ísr&oelig;ðr of Ísr&oelig;ðarstaðir</hi>, II. 3. 3.

<p>Ísr&oelig;ðr á Ketils-st&aolig;ðom, IV. 5. 4.

<p>Ívarr enn Beinlause Ragnarsson Loð&shy;brókar, Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 1. 1.

<p>Ívarr Beytill, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Ívarr Jónsson, Gm. 612.

<p>Ívarr R&aolig;gnvallzson Mæra-iarls, IV. 14. 1.

<p>Ívarr Upplendinga-iarl Hálfdanarson ens Gamla, IV. 14. 1.

<p>Ívarr Víðfaðme Hálfdanarson, Gen. A. 1.

<p>Ívarr Þórðarson, Mant. 1. 7.



<div3 id=ixK>
<head>K</head>


<p>Kálfr Ásgeirsson Æðe-kollz, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5: Cr. 6. 3.

<p>Kálfr skáld Mánason, III. 6. 5.

<p>Kálfr Snorrason, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Kálfr (Kolfiðr) af Sólheimom, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Kálfr, f. of Snorre, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Káre, abbot, Þorl. 15. 2.

<p>Káre Solmundarson, Nj. 364. 9.

<p>Káre enn Svarte, Mant. 5. 4.

<p>Káre tulkare, Gen. B. 5.

<p><hi>Karl under Karlsfelle</hi>, II. 3. 12.

<p>Karl enn Rauðe Þórsteinsson, III. 14. 5&ndash;6.

<p><hi>Karl (Steinrauðarson) á Upsastr&aolig;nd</hi>, III. 14. 7.

<p>Karle Conalsson, II. 1. 2.

<p>Katla, w. of Þórsteinn Solmundarson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Katla, m. of Þórgrímr and Þórbi&aolig;rg Colbrún, II. 20. 8.

<p><hi>Kétilbi&aolig;rn enn Gamle Ketilson</hi>, I. 4. 3: II. 26. 3: III. 8. 1: V. 7. 2; 12. 2; 13. 6; 14. 1&ndash;5; 14. 7&ndash;8; 15. 2; 17. 2: Gen. A. 13&ndash;15; B. 7: Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 2. 1; 305. 8: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Ketilbi&aolig;rn Teitzson, V. 14. 5.

<p>Ketill enn Auðge Ásbiarnarson, V. 3. 6.

<p><hi>Ketill Aurriðe</hi>, V. 7. 10; 9. 4.

<p>Ketill Bifra Horða-Kárason, I. 3. 1.

<p>Ketill Brimill Ornolfsson, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Ketill Brúnason ens Hvíta, III. 12. 4.

<p><hi>Ketill enn Einhende Auðunnarson Þunn-kárs</hi>, <pb id=pb670 n=670>II. 15. 14: V. 9. 2&ndash;7; 13. 1: Gen. B. 7.

<p><hi>Ketill enn Fíflske</hi>, IV.  16. 1; 16. 3; 16.5: V. 17. 2; 17. 5: Gen. A. 23: Cr. 4. 3.

<p>Ketill Fiorleifarson, see Ketill Þóresson Leðr-hálss.

<p>Ketill Flatnefr Biarnarson Buno, I. 4. 1; 3&ndash;5; 5. 1: II. 9. 1.; 14. 1: III. 13. 3: IV.  16. 1: Gen. A. 32; 35; B. 3; 10: Th. 1. 1&ndash;4; 2. 1&ndash;2; 3. 2; 5. 1: Mant. 5. 5: Lib. 2. 1: Thorv. 7.

<p>Ketill Gizorarson, Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Ketill Goðmundarson, Cr. 10. 8.

<p>Ketill Gunnarsson, III. 15. 7: Gen. B. 16.

<p>Ketill Hello-flage, III. 6. 1: V. 11. 1.

<p>Ketill Hermundarson, abbot, Gen. B. 14: Pol. 11. 2.

<p>Ketill H&oelig;ngr or Hrafnisto Hallbiarnarson, V. 4. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p><hi>Ketill H&oelig;ngr Þórkelsson</hi>, V. 4. 1&ndash;7; 5. 1; 6. 2&ndash;3; 7. 1; 7. 3&ndash;4; 9. 12; 17. 2; 17. 4: Gen. A. 5; 18: Lib. 3. 4.

<p>Ketill H&aolig;rða-Káre, see H&aolig;rða-Káre.

<p><hi>Ketill H&aolig;rzke Þórsteinsson Hofða</hi>, III. 19. 1&ndash;4.

<p><hi>Ketill Ilbreiðr Þórbiarnarson Talcna</hi>, II. 17. 4; 18. 6; 21. 6.

<p>Ketill Illogason ens Svarta, III. 2. 3.

<p>Ketill Kappe Þórbiarnarson, II. 7. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Ketill, f. of Ketilbi&aolig;rn enn Gamle, V. 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

<p>Ketill Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 3.

<p>Ketill í Ketilsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

<p>Ketill Kiólfare, I. 8. 1: V. 16. 4.

<p>Ketill Mánason, III. 20. 3.

<p>Ketill at Meðalfelle, IV. 14. 5.

<p>Ketill Móðolfsson, IV. 7. 3; 15. 6.

<p>Ketill Pólsson, Pol. 1. 8; 9. 2; 10. 1.

<p>Ketill Raumr Ormsson, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5 (Þrumr).

<p>Ketill Refr Skíðason, Gen. A. 32: Cr. 1. 1.

<p>Ketill enn Slétt-mále, Gen. A. 12.

<p>Ketill Smiðjo-drumbr, II. 11. 7.

<p>Ketill Veðr, herser of Hringa-ríke, I. 4. 5: II. 9. 1: III. 13. 3: Th. 1. 1.

<p>Ketill Þiðrandason (Ketill Þrymr, the younger), IV. 4. 2; 8. 1: Gen. A. 19; 27.

<p><hi>Ketill Þistill</hi>, II. 6. 1: III. 22. 2; 22. 6.

<p>Ketill, f. of Þórer Ketilsson, IV. 7. 3.

<p>Ketill Þóresson Leðr-hálss, III. 17. 2; 18. 2.

<p>Ketill Þóresson Snepils, Gen. A. 31.

<p>Ketill Þórkelsson, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Ketill Þórláksson, Ch. 636: pp. 641. 3, etc.; 642. 8, etc.

<p>Ketill Þórleifsson, Pol. 6. 3.

<p>Ketill Þórleiksson, p. 639. 6.

<p>Ketill byscop Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 32; B. 14: Mant. 1. 6; 4. 2: Lib. pr. 1; 306. 2: Cr. 10. 8; 10. 10: Hv. 2. 13; 3. 5&ndash;6; 4. 8; 5. 2:   Þorl. 14. 3: Io. 12. 5: pp. 598&ndash;601.

<p>Ketill Þórvallzson Króks, III. 14. 10.

<p><hi>Ketill Þrymr Þóresson Þiðranda</hi>, IV. 4. 1&ndash;2: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19; 27.

<p>Kiotve enn Auðge, II. 17. 3: V. 16. 4.

<p>Kirjalax, Byzantine emperor, Cr. 10. 9.

<p>Klaufe Hafþórsson, III. 14. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Klaufe Þórvallzson, Cr. 2. 3.

<p>Kleppr (al.  Klyppr) Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Kl&oelig;ingr Grímkelsson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Kl&oelig;ingr Snæbiarnarson, I. 7. 2.

<p>Kl&oeacute;ngr Þórsteinsson, bishop of Scalholt, Hv. 2. 19; 5. 1, etc.: Þorl. 6. 1; 6. 4; 7. 2, etc.;  14. 3: Io. 11. 5:  12. 5: pp. 573, 633.

<p>Kl&oeacute;ngr Þórvallzson, Pol. 13. 4.

<p>Klyppr herser Þórðarson, Gen. B. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Kn&aolig;ttr Starrason, I. 1. 2.

<p>Kn&aolig;ttr Þióðreksson, II. 15. 96; 18. 2: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Knútr Eiríksson, King of Sweden, Hv. 2. 20.

<p>Knútr Valdemarsson, King of Denmark, Pol. 3. 4;  15. 2.

<p>Kolbeinn, see Colbeinn.

<p>Kolbi&aolig;rn Sneyper, III. 13. 2.

<p>Kolfiðr af Sólheimom, see Kálfr.

<p>Kolfinna Hallzdótter, III. 7. 4: Gen. B. 11.

<p>Kolfinna Illogadótter ens Svarta, II. 4. 15.

<p>Kolfinna Oddbiarnardótter, V. 41. 3.

<p>Kolfinna Skegg-Ávalldadótter, III. 5. 16.

<p>Kolgreflingar, II. 8. 2.

<p>Kollr, Kolr, see Collr, Colr.

<p>Kollsveinn Eyvindarson Hialta, I. 5. 1.

<p>Kolskeggr enn  Fróðe Ásbiarnarson, IV. 5. 4; 8. 3; 14. 4: V. 17. 1.

<p>Kolskeggr Hámundarson, Gen. A. 5.

<p>Krákneflingar, II. 21. 1.

<p>Kristophorus, Herra, p. 640. 8, 22.

<p><hi>Kr&aolig;ko-Hreiðarr Ófeigsson Lafskeggs</hi>, III. 8. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Kropps-menn, I. 10. 2.

<p>Kromu-Oddr, I. 10. 4.

<p>Kvelld-Ulfr Brunda-Bialfason, I. 8. 1: II. 4. 1: V. 4. 1; 5. 2.

<p>Kvistlingar, V. 11. 5.

<p>Kygri-Bj&aolig;rn, Gm. 609.


<pb id=pb671 n=671>
<div3 id=ixL>
<head>L</head>


<p>Lágeyingar, IV. 18. 4.

<p>Lambe Sigmundarson (or rather Sigvatzson ens Rauða, cf. Pedigree, p. 238), V. 5. 2: Gen. 7.

<p>Lambe enn Sterke Þórðarson, II. 4. 12; 5. 20.

<p>Lambertus, bishop, Hv. 3. 12.

<p>Lambkárr Þórgilsson, Gm. 607, 609.

<p>Langaholts-Þóra, II. 5. 9&ndash;10.

<p>Langd&oeacute;ler, II. 11. 7.

<p>Laufæsingar, pp. 329, 368.

<p>Laugarbrecko-Einarr Sigmundarson, II. 6. 1&ndash;5; 15. 4: III. 22. 5.

<p>Leggr, priest, Pol. 11. 2.

<p>Leiðolfr á Leiðolfs-st&aolig;ðom, V. II. 2; 12. 2.

<p><hi>Leiðolfr Kappe í Skógahverfe</hi>, IV. 7. 2; 18. 1: V. 17. 2.

<p>Leifr enn Heppne Eiríksson Rauða, II. 12. 8; 19. 4: Cr. 8. 1.

<p>Leifr Hroðmarsson, see Hi&aolig;rleifr Hroðmarsson.

<p>Leifr Loðhattarson, II. 17. 2: Mant. 274, 276.

<p>Lemmarus, see Liemarus.

<p>Leo (VI), Byzantine emperor, I. 1. 1.

<p>Leo (IX), Pope, Lib. 9. 8: Hv. 1. 3: Io. 1. 2.

<p>Liemarus, archbishop of Hamburg, Hv. 2. 4: Io. 6. 1.

<p>Liný, d. of Þórleif Þórðardótter, II. 22. 6.

<p>Liósvetningar, p. 328.

<p>Lióðar-keptr, V. 4. 6.

<p>Liót Einarsdótter, III. 22. 1.

<p>Liót, m. of Hrolleifr, III. 5. 12.

<p>&ast;<hi>Liót á Liótar-st&aolig;ðom</hi>, V. 7. 3.

<p>Liótólfr Goðe Alreksson í Svarfaðardal, III. 12. 1; 12. 4: IV. 1. 4.

<p>Liótólfr á Liótólfs-st&aolig;ðom, II. 16. 2.

<p>Liótr, cousin of Hrolleifr, III. 5. 12.

<p>Liótr L&aolig;ngo-bak, V. 12. 4.

<p><hi>Liótr Óþveginn</hi>, III. 20. 4.

<p>Liótr Síðo-Hallzson, Gen. A. 19; B. 10; 15.

<p>Liótr enn Spake Þórgrímsson Harðrefssonar, II. 23. 2; 24. 2.

<p>Liótr, s. of Yngvildr, IV. 14. 4.

<p>Liótr Þórbiarnarson of Veggir, II. 3. 3.

<p>Liótunn, sister of Colgrímr enn Gamle, I. 9. 1.

<p>Liúfa, w. of Bi&aolig;rn í Biarnarfirðe, II. 29. 2.

<p>Liuvina, d. of the King of the Bearms, II. 17. 2.

<p>Loðh&aolig;ttr Þræll, II. 17. 2: Mant. 274.

<p>Loðinn Ongull, III. 16. 5.

<p><hi>Loðmundr enn Gamle</hi>, IV. 9. 2&ndash;5; 10. 1; 16. 1; 18. 8; 19. 1&ndash;4.

<p>Loðmundr, f. of Grímr, II. 23. 2.

<p>Loðmundr Skeggjason, IV. 16. 1.

<p>Loðmundr Svartzson í Odda, V. 8. 7: Gen. A. 1: p. 640. 11.

<p>Lofth&oeacute;na Arenbiarnardótter, II. 2. 1.

<p>Lofth&oeacute;na Erpsdótter, II. 2. 1.

<p>Loftr Byscopsson (s. of Bishop Árni), IV. 5. 2.

<p>Loftr, s. of Freygerðr, V. 16. 10.

<p><hi>Loftr enn Gamle Ormsson Fróðasonar</hi> (al. <hi>Fróðason</hi>), I. 3. 10: II. 5. 8: V. 9. 2; 10. 1&ndash;2; 10. 4&ndash;6.

<p>Loftr Pólsson, Pol. 1. 8; 9. 2; 10. 1; 13. 1.

<p>Loftr Sæmundarson í Odda, II. 22. 6: V. 11. 6: Gen. A. 1; B. 15: Pol. 1. 1: p. 640. 12.

<p>Lón-Einarr, II. 6. 1&ndash;2; 6. 5.

<p><hi>Lýtingr Arnbiarnarson</hi>, II. 3. 7: IV. 3. 1&ndash;2; 8. 2: Gen. A. 28.

<p>Lækny (al. Lecny), concubine of Þógeirr Liósvetningagoðe, III. 18. 1.



<div3 id=ixM>
<head>M</head>


<p>Mabil Hallgeirsdótter, V. 4. 7; 7. 3.

<p>Macan, Þorl. 8. 4.

<p>Maddaðr (al. Beadmacr), King of the Irish, II. 8. 3.

<p>Magnús Berbeinn (or Berf&oelig;ttr) Óláfsson, King of Norway, I.  4.  5:   Lib.  10. 12: Hv. 2. 20: Pol. 1. 1: Io. 4. 5.

<p>Magnús, Earl of Orkney, Hv. 2. 20.

<p>Magnús Einarsson, bishop, IV.  14. 4: Gen. B. 10: Hv. 4. 1 ff.: Þorl. 3. 3; 4. 1; 14. 3.

<p>Magnús Erlingsson, King of Norway, Þorl. 8. 1; 15. 1.

<p>Magnús Gizorarson, bishop, IV. 14. 4: V. 15. 2: Gen. B. 15: Pol. 6. 3; 7. 2; 14. 2: Gm. 608, 611: Ch. 635.

<p>Magnús Goðe Goðmundarson, II. 22. 6: Ch. 635.

<p>Magnús enn Góðe Ólátsson, King of Norway, Gen. B. 14: Hv. 1. 11&ndash;12.

<p>Magnús Goðmundarson, priest, II. 23. 2.

<p>Magnús Harallzson, King of Norway, Hv. 1. 12.

<p>Magnús Sigurðarson, King of Norway, Hv. 4. 3; 4. 11&ndash;12: Þorl. 1. 1.

<p>Magnús Vilborgarson, pp. 641. 2,8; 642. 38, 43.

<p>Magnús Þórðarson, II. 17. 6: Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 4. 1: Od. 4. 3: pp. 639. 1: 640. 28.

<p>Magnús Þórláksson, Ch. 635.

<p>Magnús Þórsteinsson, Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Magnús Þórsteinsson Síðo-Hallzsonar IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 10.

<pb id=pb672 n=672><p>Mág-Snorre, II. 23. 2.

<p>Mána-Liótr (Liótr Mánason), II. 7. 2: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Máne enn Kristne, Thorv. 7.

<p><hi>Máne at Mána-felle</hi>, III. 20. 3.

<p>Máne Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Máne Þórbrannzson, III. 6. 5.

<p>Markús Skeggjason, L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, V. 7. 9: Lib. 10. 2; 10. 3: Cr. 10. 3; 10.  4: Hv. 2. 7; 2. 20: Io. 6. 1&ndash;2: p. 640. 48.

<p>Markús Þórðarson á Melum, Od. 4. 1: Ch. 635: pp. 640. 49; 641. 6, etc.

<p>Margret en Haga, Pol. 13. 3.

<p>Margret H&aolig;scullzdótter lækniss, II. 23. 2.

<p>Márr Ánarson, II. 8. 5.

<p>Márr Ásmundarson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Márr Atlason ens Rauða, á Reykjahólom, II.  15. 11; 17.  4; 19. 1&ndash;3; 19. 5: Gen. A. 38; B. 12 (Ulfsson), 13.

<p>Márr Brondolfsson or Runolfsson, Gen. A. 15.

<p>Márr Hallvarðzson, II. 15. 14: Th. 11. 4.

<p>Márr Hamalsson, I. 3. 10.

<p>Márr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Márr Húnr&oelig;ðarson (f. of Hafliðe), II. 23. 2: III. 6. 3: Gen. B. 13: Mant. 1. 3; 1. 6&ndash;7.

<p>Márr Illogason, II. 11. 7; 15. 11.

<p>Márr I&aolig;rundarson Hals, III. 5. 4; 5. 16.

<p><hi>Márr Naddodzson</hi>, II. 6. 2: V. 13. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Márr Runolfsson, see Márr Brondolfsson.

<p>Márr, f. of Steinolfr (= Márr Víga-Glúmsson?), III. 19. 4.

<p>Melcorca, d. of Myrceartan, King of the Irish, II. 15. 9.

<p>Meldun, a Scottish earl, II. 14. 4; 15. 7.

<p>Mel-menn, pp. 329, 368.

<p>&ast;Mel-patrekr [Mael-Patraic], f. of Steinr&oelig;ðr, V. 16. 2.

<p>Miðfiarðar-Skegge Skinna-Biarnarson, I. 10. 7: II. 2. 4;  15. 3; 15. 14; 30. 4: III. 2. 1&ndash;3: V. 3. 4; 17. 4: Gen. A. 37.

<p>Mi&aolig;ll, d. of Án Bogsveiger, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Móðolfr Smiðr Eyvindarson Karpa, IV. 7. 3; 15. 6; 18. 1&ndash;2: Gen. A. 4 (Móðolfr Spake); 10 (id.); 25 (id.).

<p>Móðolfssyner, IV. 18. 2.

<p>Móðylfingar, Gen. A. 4.

<p>Móeiðr Hildesdótter, V. 4. 5; 7. 3.

<p><hi>Molda-Gnúpr Hrólfsson</hi>, IV. 17. 1&ndash;4: V. 9. 8; 16. 8: Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Molda-Gnúpssyner, V. 16. 8.

<p>M&aolig;rðr Ásmundarson, IV. 3. 8.

<p>M&aolig;rðr Gígja (Sigmundarson, or rather Sigvatzson ens Rauða), V. 5. 2.; 6. 2; 7. 2; 17. 4: Gen. A. 3 (see Pedigree and note, p. 238).

<p>M&aolig;rðr Órækja, IV. 18. 6.

<p>Mórr, see Márr Naddodzson.

<p>Mosfellingar, Lib. 2. 1.

<p>Mottull, king, II. 2. 1.

<p>Músa-B&aolig;lverkr Þórarensson, I. 11. 3; II. 2. 1.

<p>Mýra-Cniúcr Þórvallzson, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

<p>Mýra-menn, IV. 14. 9.

<p>Myrceartan, King of the Irish, II. 15. 9.

<p>Myrgiol, d. of Gliomal, King of the Irish, II. 14. 4.

<p>Myruna Beadmacs (al. Maddaðar) dótter Íra konungs, II. 8. 3.

<p>Mæfa Þórvarðardótter, II. 3. 4.



<div3 id=ixN>
<head>N</head>


<p>Naddoðr, I. 2. 2: II. 6. 2: V. 13. 4&ndash;5: Gen. A. 15.

<p><hi>Nafar-Helge</hi>, III. 12. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Nagle, a follower of Þórarenn Svarte, II. 7. 5.

<p>Narfe, Cr. 6. 2.

<p>Narfe Arnarson, III. 14. 10.

<p>Narfe or Brecko, Gm. 612.

<p>Narfe Einarsson, I. 7. 3.

<p>Narfe, son of Guðrún, IV. 16. 1.

<p>Narfe Snorrason, Gen. B. 9&ndash;10.

<p>Narfe Þórmóðarson, III. 12. 7.

<p><hi>Náttfare í Náttfaravík</hi>, I. 2. 1&ndash;2: III. 19. 2.

<p>Nefsteinn Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

<p>Nereiðr iarl enn Sínke (al. Gamle), V. 16. 4.

<p><hi>Nesja-Cniúcr Þórolfsson Sparrar</hi>, II. 20. 8&ndash;9; 21. 4; 23. 2.

<p>Nes-menn, IV. 10. 2.

<p>Niall byscop, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Niall Herlaugsson, V. 16. 9.

<p>Niall Sigmundarson í Skógom, V. 2. 2.

<p>Niall Þórgeirsson (Brenno-Niall), V. 3. 5: Gen. 8&ndash;11: Nj. 364&ndash;8.

<p>Nicholas (Bergþórsson), abbot, Hv. 5. 7.

<p>Nicholas, bishop of Mirrea, Hv. 2. 20.

<p>Nicholas, bishop of Osló, Pol. 13. 2.

<p>Nicholas Sigurðarson, Hv. 5. 13.

<p>Niðbi&aolig;rg, d. of King Beolan, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3.

<p>Ni&aolig;rðr, King of the Swedes, Lib. 306. 4.

<p>Nórr, mythical king, IV. 12. 1.



<div3 id=ixO>
<head>O</head>


<p>Óblauðr Otryggsson, II. 17. 1; 20. 3; 27. 1: Gen. A. 30 (Hi&aolig;rleifsson); B. 12 (id.).

<pb id=pb673 n=673><p>Odda-verjar, III. 6. 4: V. 6. 2: Gen. A. 1; 32.

<p>Oddbi&aolig;rg Grímsdótter, II. 23. 2.

<p>Oddbi&aolig;rn Aska-smiðr, V. 4. 3; 4. 7.

<p>Odde Ásolfsson í H&aolig;fða, IV. 2. 3: p. 642. 10.

<p>Odde Cetilsson Gufu, see Odde Yrarson.

<p>Odde Grímson, p. 601.

<p>Odde Snerisson, Gen. B. 9; 11: Mant. 1. 3; 1. 6.

<p>Odde, f. of Þórhallr Goðe í Diúpafirðe, II. 15. 9 b.

<p>Odde (al. Oddr) Yrarson, I. 11. 4: II. 15. 9 b; 17. 6; 20. 2; 20. 6: Gen. B. 2 (Gen. B. 8 Brodde Þóroddzson?).

<p>Odde Þórgerðarson, p. 641. 31.

<p>Oddfríðr Helgadótter, II. 7. 2.

<p>&ast;<hi>Oddgeirr of Oddgeirshólar</hi>, I. 7. 12: V. 11. 5.

<p>Oddkatla I&aolig;rundardótter, II. 19. 5; 20. 2.

<p>Oddkatla, d. of (al. wife of) Ófeigr Þórólfsson Fasthalda, II. 26. 6.

<p>Oddkatla Þórðardótter, II. 23. 2.

<p>Oddkatla Þórvallzdótter, II. 8. 1.

<p>Oddkell Stórolfsson, V. 4. 4.

<p>Oddlaug Eyvindardótter, IV. 19. 1.

<p>Oddlaug Vébrannzdótter, V. 13. 6.

<p>Oddleif Ketilbiarnardótter, V. 14. 3.

<p>Oddleifr Geirleifsson, II. 21. 1; 21. 4: V. 15. 1: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Oddleifr Stafr Flókason, III. 11. 5.

<p>Oddleifr Þórðarson Kráko-nefs, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 10.

<p>Oddmar Þórunnarson, II. 16. 2.

<p>Oddný Brodd-Helgadótter, Gen. A. 29.

<p>Oddný Magnúsdótter, Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Oddný (al. Ásborg) Oddzdótter ens Mióva, V. 7. 5; 9. 4.

<p>Oddný Þórbiarnardótter ens Gaulverska, V. 10. 1.

<p>Oddný Þórhallzdótter, p. 641. 19, 38.

<p>Oddr á Alfta-nese, II. 4. 13.

<p>Oddr Arngeirsson, III. 22. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Oddr Ásolfsson, II. 15. 13.

<p>Oddr Bitro-Oddason, II. 29. 3.

<p>Oddr Breiðfirðingr, III. 10. 2.

<p>Oddr Draflason, II. 11. 7.

<p>Oddr Hallkelsson of Kiðjaberg, I. 10. 3: II. 26. 2&ndash;3: V. 15. 2.

<p>Oddr Hallvarðzson, V. 12. 3.

<p>Oddr, father of Hrafn Hlymreks-fare, II. 18. 1.

<p>Oddr á I&aolig;rva, II. 12. 1.

<p>Oddr Kaldmunnr, V. 3. 7.

<p>Oddr enn Mióve Helgason Hrogns, V. 7. 5; 7. 9; 9. 4.

<p>Oddr munkr Há-Snorrason, II. 29. 3: III. 1. 2.

<p>Oddr Ófeigsson, Nj. 368. 26.

<p>Oddr Onundarson, see Tungo-Oddr.

<p>Oddr Ormsson, III. 4. 2.

<p>Oddr enn Racke Þórviðarson, II. 5. 6: Th. 7. 3.

<p><hi>Oddr Skraute</hi>, II. 17. 5.

<p>Oddr Sveinbiarnarson, II. 4. 13.

<p>Oddr Unason, III. 5. 12; 11. 3.

<p>Oddr Yrarson, see Odde Yrarson.

<p>Oddr, f. of Þórgrímr, II. 7. 3.

<p>Oddr Þórgrímsson í Axlar-haga, III. 8. 4.

<p>Oddr Þórormsson, III. 4. 1.

<p>Oðr, see Auðr.

<p>Ófeigr Burlo-fótr Ívarsson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5 (Óleifr Bullo-fótr).

<p>Ófeigr Gretter Einarsson (al. Oleifsson Breiðs Einarssonar), V. 4. 5; 4. 7; 13. 1&ndash;2: Mant. 5. 5.

<p><hi>Ófeigr Herr&oelig;ðarson</hi>, II. 28. 4.

<p><hi>Ófeigr Lafskegg Yxna-Þóresson</hi>, III. 8. 2.

<p>Ófeigr Loðmundarson, IV. 19. 4.

<p>Ófeigr í Raumsdal, I. 10. 7: V. 3. 4: Gen. A. 8 (Þórolfr).

<p>Ófeigr Þórarensson, III. 12. 1.

<p>Ófeigr Þórolfsson Fasthalda, II. 17. 6; 26. 6.

<p>Ófeigr Þunnskeggr Kráko-Hreiðarsson, III. 8. 3.

<p>Ogmundr H&aolig;rða-Kárason, Gen. B. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Ogmundr Kálfsson, abbot of Helgafell, Þorl. 7. 2; 15. 2.

<p>Ogmundr V&aolig;lo-Steinsson, II. 18. 3; 24. 2; 24. 5.

<p>Ogmundr Þórkelsson, I. 5. 1: V. 3. 2: Io. 1. 1: ? Ch. 631.

<p>Ogmundr Þórvarðzson, Gm. 607.

<p><hi>Óláfr Beckr Karlsson</hi>, III. 12. 6&ndash;7.

<p><hi>Óláfr Belgr</hi>, II. 7. 4&ndash;5; 18. 3.

<p>Óláfr, bishop of Greenland, Mant. 6. 1.

<p>Óláfr enn Digre (= Ó. enn Helge), Lib. 1. 4; 8. 4.

<p>Óláfr at Dr&aolig;ngom, II. 26. 4.

<p>Óláfr Egilsson ens Rauða, IV. 10. 3.

<p>Óláfr, f. of Goðmundr the priest, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Óláfr Goðr&oelig;ðarson, Lib. 306. 12.

<p>Óláfr Harallzsonar ens Hárfagra, Lib. 7. 1.

<p>Óláfr at Haukagil, Cr. 2. 1: Thorv. 5.

<p>Óláfr Hávarðarson Halta, II. 24. 8; 26. 1.

<p>Óláfr, king in the Hebrides, Gm. 615.

<p>Óláfr, canon at Helgafell, Ch. 633.

<pb id=pb674 n=674><p>Óláfr Helgason, II. 23. 2.

<p>Óláfr enn Helge Harallzson, King of Norway, II. 29. 1: III. 4. 1; 5. 13: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1: Hv. 1. 11&ndash;12: Io. 1. 1; 2. 2.

<p>Óláfr Herjolfsson Hornabriótz, V. 2. 1.

<p>Óláfr, f. of Hyrningr, Gen. B. 9.

<p><hi>Óláfr Iafna-collr</hi>, II. 22. 5; 26. 5.

<p>Óláfr enn Kyrre Harallzson, King of Norway, Lib. 10. 1; 10. 12: Cr. 10. 3: Hv. 1. 11; 2. 14; 2. 20: Io. 4. 5; 6. 1.

<p>Óláfr Magnússon, King of Norway, Hv. 2. 20: Io. 14. 3.

<p>Óláfr enn S&oelig;nski Eiríksson, Lib. 7. 9.

<p>Óláfr Trételgja, Lib. pr. 2; 306. 10.

<p>Óláfr Tryggvason, King of Norway, II. 30. 4: III. 20. 2: V. 7. 2: Gen. B. 5&ndash;7: Mant. 2. 2; 5. 1: Lib. 7. 1; 7. 9; 8. 4; 9. 8; 10. 12: Cr. 3. 2, &amp;c.: Thorv. 7: Io. 6. 1.

<p><hi>Óláfr Tvennum-brúne</hi>, V. 12. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Óláfr V&aolig;lo-briótr Ásgeirsson, III. 14. 6.

<p>Óláfr Þórarensson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Óláfr, see also Óleifr.

<p>Óleifr B&aolig;ðmóðsson, IV. 16. 2.

<p>Óleifr Breiðr Einarsson, V. 13. 1: Gen. A. 16: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Óleifr Bullo-fótr, see Ófeigr Burlo-fótr.

<p>Óleifr Cvaran, I. 8. 3.

<p><hi>Óleifr Feilan Þórsteinsson Rauðs</hi>, II. 10. 5; 14. 1; 15. 14: V. 13. 1: Gen. A. 36&ndash;37; B. 1: Th. 9. 1: Lib. 5. 1; 305. 16; 306. 14.

<p>Óleifr Goðr&oelig;ðarson, king, II. 14. 1.

<p><hi>Óleifr Hialte</hi>, I. 9. 4: Gen. A. 18: Lib. 3. 5.

<p>Óleifr enn Hvíte Ingiallzson, King of Dublin, II. 14. 1: Gen. A. 35&ndash;36; B. 12: Th. 1. 4: Lib. 306. 13.

<p>Óleifr enn Hvíte Skæringsson, V. 3. 2.

<p>Óleifr Langhals Biarnarson, II. 3. 7; 8. 2.

<p>Óleifr Páe H&aolig;scullzson, II. 9. 3; 15. 9; 29. 1: Gen. A. 35 (Óláfr); B. 5 (id.), 13 (id.): Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Óleifr, see also Óláfr.

<p>Óli (al. Áli) Svarth&aolig;fðason, p. 639. 12.

<p>Olm&oeacute;ðlingar, IV. 10. 8.

<p>Olmóðr enn Gamle H&aolig;rða-Kárason, I. 3. 2: Gen. B. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Olmóðr Vémundarson, IV. 10. 8.

<p>Ólof, see Álof.

<p><hi>Olver Barnakarl Einarsson</hi>, I. 2. 2: II. 9. 4; 15. 14; 17. 3: III. 14. 4: V. 13. 1: 13. 4; 16. 3: Gen. A. 16: Mant. 5. 5.

<p><hi>Olver Eysteinsson</hi>, IV. 18. 3; 18. 6.

<p>Olver Finnason, II. 2. 1.

<p>Olver Hásteinsson, V. 11. 2.

<p>Olver enn Hvíte Ósvallzson (al. Olvesson), IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28: Mant. 5. 6.

<p>Olver Muðr Vilbaldsson, IV. 17. 5.

<p>Olver, f. of Þóra, V. 11. 2.

<p>Olvusingar, IV. 19. 2.

<p>Ondótt, sister of Olver Barna-karl, II. 9. 4; 17. 3.

<p>Ondóttr í Viðvík, III. 9. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Ondóttr Kráka Erlingson Knýtis, III. 13. 2&ndash;3; 14. 21; 15. 1&ndash;2; 15. 4&ndash;5; 20. 1: Gen. A. 13.

<p>Ondóttzsyner, III. 14. 21; 15. 2&ndash;5   (see Ásmundr and Ásgrímr).

<p>Ongull enn Svarte Þórkelsson, III. 16. 1.

<p>Onundarsyner, V. 7. 2   (see Eilífr enn Auðge and Sigmundr Cleyker).

<p><hi>Onundr Bíldr Hróarsson</hi>, IV. 18. 7: V. 5. 2; 7. 2; 7. 5; 11. 6; 12. 2; 14. 7; 16. 1.

<p><hi>Onundr Bl&oelig;ingsson</hi>, III. 20. 5.

<p><hi>Onundr Breiðskeggr Ulfarsson</hi> (al. Kromu-Oddsson), I. 10. 1; 10. 4: V. 17. 2.

<p>Onundr Colsson í Trolla-skóge, Gen. A. 12.

<p>Onundr Eyvindarson Karpa, IV. 15. 6; 18. 3.

<p>Onundr Hrollaugsson, IV. 14. 4.

<p>Onundr at Mosfelle, f. of Skáld-Hrafn, II. 6. 4.

<p>Onundr Sióne Ánason, II. 4. 8; 7. 5.

<p>Onundr Tosco-bak, IV. 18. 2: Gen. A. 21.

<p><hi>Onundr Tréfótr Ófeigsson</hi>, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p><hi>Onundr Víkingsson</hi>, II. 24. 4.

<p><hi>Onundr Vís</hi>, III. 8. 5.

<p>Onundr Þórgilsson Vámúla, III. 19. 5: Cr. 1. 3.

<p>Onundr Þórkelsson, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Onundr Þórsteinsson ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1.

<p>&OElig;rlygr B&aolig;ðvarsson Vígsterkssonar, II. 20. 3; 27. 1.

<p><hi>&OElig;rlygr enn Gamle Hrappsson of Esjoberg</hi>, I. 6. 1&ndash;4; 10. 1; 11. 2: II. 20. 6; 21. 45: V. 17. 2; 17. 5: p. 327. 16.

<p>&OElig;rlygr, a freedman of Þórfinnr í Alftafirðe, II. 11. 4: Th. 8. 2.

<p>Ormarr, f. of Hildr, I. 4. 4; see Ulfarr.

<p>Ormarr, f. of Þórbi&aolig;rn enn Gaulverske, V. 10. 3.

<p>Ormhildr Hróarsdótter, IV. 18. 1.

<p>Ormr, a descendant of Þr&aolig;str Hermundarson, II. 30. 3.

<pb id=pb675 n=675><p><hi>Ormr Auðge Ulfsson ens Hvassa</hi>, V. 9. 5.

<p>Ormr Aurge Herjolfsson, V. 3. 7.

<p>Ormr Coðransson, Cr. 1. 4; 1. 5; 8. 7: Thorv. 1: Ch. 636.

<p>Ormr Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

<p>Ormr Eyjolfsson, chaplain to Bishop Thorlac, III. 4. 1: Þorl. 12. 9: Od. 6. 4.

<p>Ormr Fróðason, V. 10. 1; 10. 4.

<p><hi>Ormr</hi> (al. <hi>Grímr</hi>) <hi>enn Gamle Eyvindarson</hi>, V. 16. 4.

<p>Ormr enn Gamle Ormsson, V. 16. 4.

<p>Ormr enn Gamle, at Rauðalæk, Od. 1. 2.

<p>Ormr Galmansson, III. 14. 12.

<p>Ormr Gellisson, III. 15. 8.

<p>Ormr Hallason ens Hvíta, III. 15. 8.

<p>Ormr Hallzson, V. 15. 2.

<p>Ormr Hermundarson, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Ormr Ioansson Loptzsonar, Pol. 4. 3; 6. 3; 7. 2: Od. 2. 2.

<p><hi>Ormr enn Mióve</hi>, II. 7. 5.

<p><hi>Ormr í Ormsdal</hi>, III. 4. 2.

<p>Ormr Skelja-mole Hrossbiarnarson, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Ormr Skógar-nef Hámundarson, V. 7. 2: Gen. 5.

<p>Ormr enn Sterke Stórolfsson, V. 4. 4; 4. 7; 6. 3; 7. 2: Gen. A. 5.

<p>Ormr Tosco-bak Þóresson Snepils, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31: Cr. 1. 3.

<p>Ormr, s. of Þórdís Biarnardótter, III. 11. 2.

<p>Ormr Þóresson, III. 20. 2.

<p>Ormr Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

<p>Ormr Þórkelsson Gollcars, V. 12. 3.

<p>Ormr Þórvallzson (al. Galmansson), III. 14. 12.

<p>Orn, Od. 5. 2.

<p>Orn Ánarson, III. 20. 2.

<p>Orn Bi&aolig;rnolfsson, I. 3. 1: Gen. B. 10: Th. 3. 3.

<p>Orn Darrason, V. 16. 4.

<p>Orn Eysteinsson í Fliótom, III. 6. 6.

<p><hi>Orn enn Gamle of Háreksstaðer</hi>, II. 3. 10.

<p><hi>Orn</hi>, kinsman of Geirmundr Heljar-skinn, II. 22. 1&ndash;2: III. 14. 9&ndash;11.

<p>Orn Hyrna Þóresson, IV. 12. 1; 13. 1: Gen. B. 15 (Onarsson).

<p>Orn Sterke Þórðarson Illoga, IV. 14. 10.

<p>Orn Þórkelsson, Io. 12. 2.

<p>Orn, the vagrant, III. 8. 9.

<p>Orn í Véli-gerðe, V. 7. 1&ndash;2; 12. 2.

<p>Ornolfr, a bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

<p>Ornolfr Arnmóðsson ens Rauða, II. 20. 9; 21. 3.

<!-- TODO: FIX MORE PAGE NUMBERS 730.png -->

<pb id=pb708 n=708>

<p>Ornolfr Bi&aolig;rnolfsson, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Ornolfr Fisk-reke, II. 10. 1: Gen. A. 36: Th. 2. 3.

<p>Ornolfr, f. of Halldórr, IV. 18. 6.

<p>Ornolfr Heðinsson í Sóknadal, III. 15. 2.

<p><hi>Ornolfr of Ornolfsstaðir</hi>, II. 2. 5.

<p>Ornolfr í Skógom, Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Ornolfr Slétto-Biarnarson, III. 9. 2.

<p>Ornolfr Þórðarson Slítanda, III. 14. 15; 15. 9.

<p>Ósc Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 10. 5; 14. 1; 15. 12; 20. 1: Gen. A. 36: Th. 7. 5: Lib. 4. 2.

<p>Ósc Þórsteinsdótter Surtz, II. 20. 1.

<p>Óspakr Bollason, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Óspakr Osvifsson, II. 9. 3; 24. 1: Gen. B. 3: Cr. 3. 6.

<p>Ósvaldr konungr enn Helge, Gen. A. 32.

<p>Ósvaldr Yxna-Þóresson, IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28: Mant. 5. 6.

<p>Osvifr enn Spake Helgason, II. 9. 3; 15. 8; 20. 7; 24. 1: III. 21. 3: Gen. A. 36; B. 3: Th. 7. 3: Lib. 4. 2: Cr. 3. 6.

<p>Otkatla, see Oddkatla.

<p>Otkatla Þórgilsdótter, V. 13. 3.

<p>Otkell, f. of Fiðr, V. 3. 4.

<p>Otkell Hallkelsson or Kirkjo-b&oeacute;, V. 7. 8; 15. 2: Gen. A. 15 (Skarfsson).

<p>Otkell Þórbiarnarson Laxa-karls, V. 13. 3.

<p>Ótryggr Hi&aolig;rleifsson ens Kvensama, II. 17. 1: Gen. A. 38 (Úblauðsson): B. 12 (id.).

<p>Óttarr, Lib. 306. 8.

<p>Óttarr Biarnarson Austræna, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Óttarr B&aolig;llr, V. 7. 7: Gen. A. 12.

<p>Óttarr Egilsson, Gen. A. 12.

<p>Óttarr í Grímstungom, III. 5. 16.

<p>Óttarr Hvalró Hróallzson, IV. 14. 4.

<p>Óttarr Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

<p>Otto enn Unge, Emperor, Cr. 3. 3.

<p>Oxe Hialtason, Io. 9. 1.

&OElig;xna-Þórer, see Yxna-Þórer.

<p>Ozorr, archbishop of Lund, Hv. 2. 9; 2. 11; 3. 2; 3. 6; 4. 3; 4. 11&ndash;12: Io. 7. 2, &amp;c.

<p>Ozorr Arnarson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Ozorr Ásbiarnarson í Backa-holte, IV. 15. 3: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 25.

<p>Ozorr frá Breið-&aoacute;, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Ozorr Brynjolfsson ens Gamla, IV. 5. 2.

<p>Ozorr Egilsson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Ozorr Eyvindarson, V. 16. 6.

<pb id=pb709 n=709>

<p>Ozorr Herjolfsson, IV. 11. 4.

<p><hi>Ozorr enn Hvíte Þórleifsson</hi>, V. 10. 5; 12. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Ozorr Keileselgr Hrollaugsson, IV. 12. 2; 14. 4; 14. 10: Gen. A. 19: B. 10: Lib. 305. 12.

<p><hi>Ozorr Slaga-collr</hi>, IV. 3. 8.

<p>Ozorr Þórgrimsson Campa, V. 12. 1.



<div3 id=ixP>
<head>P</head>


<p>Páll, bishop, see Póll.

<p>Páll Solvason of Reykjaholt, II. 17. 6: Hv. 4. 10: Þorl. 11. 6.

<p>Páll Þórðarson í Vatz-firðe, Mant. I. 7: Hv. 5. 13.

<p>Palna-Tóki, pp. 324&ndash;5.

<p>Papar, Irish monks, Prol.; IV. 16. 1.

<p>Paschalis II, Pope, Lib. 10. 12: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 2. 9; 2. 16: Io. 7. 5; 7. 7.

<p>Patrecr, apostle of Ireland, Hv. epil.

<p>Patrecr enn Helge, bishop in the Southreys, I. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Pétr Bárðarson, Gm. 612.

<p>Pétr, bishop of Roskilde, Pol. 3. 5.

<p>Pétr Jónsson, p. 639. 5.

<p>Pétr frá Óse, III. 3. 1.

<p>Pétr Snorrason í Skógarnese, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Petrus, an Armenian bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

<p>Philippus, earl, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Philippus, King of France, Hv. 2. 16.

<p>Philippus, King of Sweden, Lib. 10. 12: Cr. 10. 9.

<p>Philippus Sæmundarson, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Póll, bishop of Bergen, Þorl. 8. 2.

<p>Póll Ioansson, bishop of Scalholt, Þorl. 4. 4; 7. 2; 12. 2; 14. 1: Pol. 1. 1, &amp;c.: Od. 2. 2: Gm. 611, 612: pp. 640. 13; 641. 4.



<div3 id=ixR>
<head>R</head>


<p>Ráðbarðr, f. of Rannvér, Gen. A. 32.

<p><hi>Raðormr í Vetleifsholte</hi>, IV. 17. 4: V. 9. 8; 9. 11.

<p>Radulfr (al. Randulfr) Yxna-Þóresson, III. 14. 20.

<p>Rafn, see also Hrafn.

<p>Rafn Oddzson, Herra, II. 22. 5: pp. 639. 3, 11; 640. 19.

<p>Rafn Þórkelsson ens Svarta, III. 16. 1.

<p>Raforta, d. of Cearval, King of the Irish, III. 13. 2: Gen. A. 32: Th. 1. 4.

<p>Rage Áleifsson Hialta, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14: Gen. A. 18.

<p>Ragnarr Loðbrók, III. 4. 1; 11. 1: Gen. A. 32; 35&ndash;6; B. 5: Th. 1. 4: Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 1. 1; 306. 13.

<pb id=pb710 n=710><p>Ragneiðr Arnórsdótter, p. 641. 40.

<p>Ragneiðr Eyjolfsdótter, III. 15. 13: Cr. 2. 4.

<p>Ragneiðr Þórhallzdótter, Þorl. 4. 4: Pol. 1. 1: Od. 2. 2; 6. 1; 6. 5.

<p>Ragnhildr Ragnarsdótter Loðbrókar, Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Ragnhildr Sigurðardótter Hiartar, V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Ragnildr Barkardótter, p. 640. 7, 20, 24.

<p>Ragnildr Hrólfsdótter Nefjo, IV. 14. 1.

<p>Rane Ísólfsson, IV. 18. 3.

<p>Rannveig, Gm. 606.

<p>Rannveig Eiríksdótter, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Rannveig Eyvindardótter, V. 5. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Rannveig Gnúpsdótter, V. 9. 8.

<p>Rannveig Griótgarðardótter Hlaða-jarls, II. 23. 2; 24. 1.

<p>Rannveig (Sigmundardótter, or) Sigvatzdótter ens Rauða, V. 5. 2; 7. 2; Gen. A. 5.

<p>Rannveig Sigurðardótter, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Rannveig, d. of Steinv&aolig;r (<hi>or</hi> Steinunn) Brannzdótter, II. 23. 2: IV. 3. 7.

<p>Rannveig Teitzdótter, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Rannveig Þórgeirsdótter, III. 8. 1: Gen. A. 28.

<p>Rannveig Þórsteinsdótter Tialdst&oeacute;ðings, V. 8. 6.

<p>Rannvér Ráðbarðzson, Gen. A. 32.

<p><hi>Rauða-Bi&aolig;rn</hi> (= <hi>Bi&aolig;rn of Dalsminne</hi>), II. 3. 11.

<p>Rauða-Bi&aolig;rn of Rauða-Biarnarstaðir, II. 4. 5.

<p>Rauðl&oeacute;kingar, IV. 15. 4.

<p>Rauðmelingar, p. 328.

<p>&ast;Rauðr Ceallacsson, V. 7. 1.

<p>Rauðr Gunnarsson. II. 15. 14.

<p><hi>Rauðr of Rauðsgil</hi>, I. 10. 5.

<p>Rauðr Rugga, III. 9. 4; 14. 5.

<p>Raumr Iotun-biarnarson, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Refr frá Barðe, III. 11. 2: Cr. 2. 3.

<p>Refr enn Mikle, II. 5. 6.

<p>Refr enn Rauðe, IV. 2. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Refr Steinbiarnarson, IV. 2. 2.

<p>Refr Þórsteinsson, I. 6. 7&ndash;8; 7. 7: II. 21. 1.

<p>Reginleif Sæmundardótter, III. 7. 1: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Reinn Styrmisson, III. 19. 5.

<p><hi>Reistr Biarneyja-Ketilsson</hi>, III. 22. 2.

<p>Reykhyltingar, Od. 4. 3.

<p>Reyknesingar, II. 19. 3: Gen. B. 11.

<p>Reyne-Bi&aolig;rn, see Bi&aolig;rn at Reyne.

<p>Reyrketill, V. 3. 6.

<p>Rifla (<hi>or</hi> Hrifla) Þórsteinsson, pp. 639. 8; 641. 15.

<pb id=pb711 n=711><p>Ríkarðr, King of England, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Ríkini, a French priest, Io. 12.4; 13. 5&ndash;6: p. 592.

<p>Riúpa Arnallzdótter, III. 7. 1; 11. 2.

<p>Riúpa Hrútzdótter, II. 15. 10.

<p>Riúpa Þórkelsdótter, II. 15. 8.

<p>Róarr, f. of Slétto-Bi&aolig;rn, III. 9. 2.

<p>Rodolfr, a foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1&ndash;2: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Roðrekr, a thrall of Hrosskell í Svartár-dal. III. 7. 7&ndash;8.

<p>R&aolig;gnvaldr herkonungr, p. 326. 7.

<p>R&aolig;gnvaldr Kale, earl of the Orkneys, Mant. 2. 1.

<p>R&aolig;gnvaldr Mæra-jarl Eysteinsson Glumro, II. 20. 2; 23. 1: III. 22. 1: IV. 14. 1&ndash;2: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19: B. 7. 10: Lib. 2. 1.

<p>R&aolig;nguðr, a freedman of Eiríkr or Goðd&aolig;lom, III. 7. 8.

<p>Rúnolfr Ketilsson (biskups), II. 7. 2: Gen. B. 14: Hv. 5. 5.

<p>Rúnolfr Naddaðarson, see Brondolfr: (Gen. A. 15).

<p>Rúnolfr Ulfsson Aurgoða, V. 9. 12; 13. 6: Gen. A. 2: Cr. 1. 2; 6. 1; 6. 3; 7. 1; 8. 2; 8. 10.

<p>Rúnolfr, f. of Valgerðr, Gen. A. 32.

<p>Rúnolfr Þórláksson, I. 9. 4: V. 13. 4: Lib. 10. 10: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 3. 1.

<p>Rúnolfr Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 17.



<div3 id=ixS>
<head>S</head>


<p>Salbi&aolig;rg Berdlo-Káradótter, I. 8. 1.

<p>Salgerðr Arngeirsdótter, III. 18. 1.

<p>Salgerðr Iónsdótter, p. 639. 13; 640. 13.

<p>Salgerðr Steinolfsdótter Birtings, II. 20. 8.

<p>Salgerðr Steinolfsdótter or Hrísey, III. 14. 4.

<p>Salgerðr (al. Valgerðr) Ulfsdótter ens Skiálga, II. 22. 5.

<p>Sámr Barkarson, II. 10. 5.

<p>Sámr Þórsteinsson Surtz, II. 20. 1.

<p>Sandfellingar, IV. 15. 3.

<p>Sandvíkingar, IV. 10. 4.

<p>Saxe Alfarensson, II. 7. 1.

<p>&ast;Scialldbeorn, a thrall of Hi&aolig;rleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 4.

<p>&ast;Score enn ellre, an Irish thrall of Cetill Gufa, II. 20. 3; 20. 5.

<p>&ast;<hi>Score</hi>, a freedman of Cetil Gufa, I. 9. 4: II. 20. 3.

<p>Scúmr Ceartansson, II. 5. 9.

<p>Sela-Kálfr Oddzson, III. 8. 4.

<p><hi><corr sic="Sel-þórer">Sel-Þórer</corr> Grímsson</hi>, I. 10. 3: II. 5. 2&ndash;4: V. 17. 2.

<p>Seyðfirðingar, IV. 10. 1.

<pb id=pb712 n=712><p>Síðo-Hallr Þórsteinsson, III. 21. 2: IV. 12. 2; 14. 3&ndash;4: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 19; 25; B. 10; 15: Lib. 7. 1; 7. 6; 305. 12; Cr. 1. 2; 4. 2; 8. 6&ndash;7; p. 418: Hv. 4. 1: Io. 1. 1.

<p>Síðo-menn, Gen. B. 10: Lib. 2. 1.

<p>Sigarr konungr á Steig, III. 16. 5.

<p>Sigfastr (al. Sighvatr), father-in-law of King (earl?) Solvar, III. 13. 2.

<p>Sigfúss Ásgrímsson Elliða-Grímssonar, III. 15. 5.

<p>Sigfúss Elliða-Grímsson, I. 6. 8: Gen. A. 13.

<p>Sigfúss Grímsson, priest, Pol. 10. 1.

<p>Sigfúss Loðmundarson, f. of Sæmundr fróðe, I. 6. 8: V. 8. 7: Gen. A. 1; 13: p. 640. 11.

<p>Sigfúss Sigmundarson í Hlíð (or rather Sigvatzson ens Rauða, see  Pedigree, p. 238), V. 5. 2; 6. 2 (Vigfúss); 8. 6: Gen. A. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Sigfúss Sigvatzson, Nj. 364, 367.

<p><hi>Sigmundr Cleyker Onundarson Bíldz</hi>, IV. 17. 2; 18. 7: V. 7. 2.

<p>Sigmundr Gnúpa-Bárðarson, III. 17. 2; 21. 1: IV. 15. 5: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Sigmundr, f. of Goðrún, Gen. B. 14.

<p><hi>Sigmundr Ketilsson Þistils</hi>, II. 6. 1; 6. 6: III. 22. 5.

<p>Sigmundr Lambason, Gen. A. 7.

<p>Sigmundr, f. of Niáll í Skógom, V. 2. 2.

<p>Sigmundr Ormsson, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Sigmundr Sigvatzson ens Rauða  (or rather b. of Sigvatr Raude, see Pedigree, p. 238), V. 4. 7; 5. 2; 7. 2.

<p>Sigmundr, a freedman of Skalla-Grímr, II. 4. 4.

<p>Sigmundr Valsson (al. Valason), IV. 19. 1.

<p>Sigmundr á Vestfold, III. 9. 4.

<p>Sigmundr Volsungsson, mythical King, Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Sigmundr Þórbeinesson, Th. 8. 3.

<p>Sigmundr Þórgilsson, Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Sigmundr Þórkelsson, III. 9. 2; 21. 2.

<p>Signý Óblauðsdótter, II. 20. 3; 27. 1.

<p>Signý Sigvatzdótter, III. 13. 2; 15. 2.

<p>Signý Valbrannzdótter, I. 9. 1; 10. 1.

<p>Signý Valþiófsdótter, I. 6. 6 (= Signý Valbrannzdótter?).

<p>Sigríðr Hafliðadótter, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Sigríðr (Sigurðardótter), V. 5. 2.

<p>Sigríðr Sigvatzdótter, p. 640. 41.

<p><corr sic="Sígríðr">Sigríðr</corr> Sleito-Biarnardótter, II. 22. 8.

<p>Sigríðr Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Sigríðr Þórarensdótter, I. 11. 3.

<pb id=pb713 n=713><p>Sigríðr Þórarensdótter Falkasonar, p. 642. 1.

<p>Sigríðr Þórðardótter Hreðo, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Sigríðr Þórgeirsdótter Goða, III. 18. 1.

<p>Sigr&oelig;ðr iarl enn Ríke Eysteinsson Glumro, II. 14. 1; 14. 4.

<p>Sigtryggr Leysinge, Gen. A. 9.

<p>Sigtryggr Snarfare, I. 8. 1: V. 4. 1.

<p>Sigurðr Bióða-Skalle Eiríksson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 1. 5.

<p>Sigurðr byscop enn Ríke, III. 20. 2.

<p>Sigurðr Fáfnes-bane Sigmundarson, Gen. B. 12: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Sigurðr Grímsson K&aolig;gors, II. 24. 2.

<p>Sigurðr Harallzson, King of Norway, Hv. 5. 12&ndash;13.

<p>Sigurðr Hi&aolig;rtr, Norwegian King, I. 8. 1: V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Sigurðr Hlaða-iarl Hákonarson, V. 11. 2.

<p>Sigurðr Hringr Rannvésson, Gen. A. 32; B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Sigurðr Hríse Harallzson ens Hárfagra, V. 12. 1 (?): Lib. 9. 1.

<p>Sigurðr enn Hvíte, Mant. 5. 4.

<p>Sigurðr Ioansson Loptzsonar, Od. 2. 2: p. 640. 13.

<p>Sigurðr Jónsson, Ch. 635 (? = prec.).

<p>Sigurðr Iósteinsson, I. 7. 11.

<p>Sigurðr enn Landverske Helgason, V. 12. 4.

<p>Sigurðr Liótzson L&aolig;ngo-baks, V. 12. 4.

<p>Sigurðr Magnússon, Iorsalafare, King of Norway, Lib. 10. 12: Hv. 3. 13: Io. 7. 7; 14. 3.

<p>Sigurðr Mársson, I. 3. 10.

<p>Sigurðr Ormr-í-Auga Ragnarsson, Gen. A. 35&ndash;6; B. 12: Th. 1. 4: Mant. 5. 1&ndash;2: Lib. 306. 13.

<p>Sigurðr Ormsson at Swinefell, Od. 1. 1: Gm. 610&ndash;12.

<p>Sigurðr enn Ríke, Earl of the Orkneys, I. 1. 1.

<p>Sigurðr Slefa (Eiríksson), Norwegian King, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Sigurðr Slembidiakn, Hv. 4. 12.

<p>Sigurðr Svính&aolig;fðe, II. 7. 7.

<p>Sigurðr Sýr Hálfdanarson, Norwegian King, Mant. I. 1; 3. 2: Lib. 9. 1: Io. 4. 5.

<p>Sigurðr Víkinga-Kárason, Gen. B. 6.

<p>Sigurðr Þórarensson, IV. 1. 2.

<p>Sigurðr Þóresson Hundz, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Sigurðr Þórgrímsson, V. 16. 7.

<p>Sigvalde, Earl, Cr. 9. 2.

<p>Sigvatr Brannzson, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Sigvatr Hálfdanarson, Ch. 637.

<p>Sigvatr Hallbiarnarson, the priest, III. 4. 1.

<pb id=pb714 n=714><p>Sigvatr or Hlíðom, III. 13. 2; 15. 2.

<p><hi>Sigvatr enn Rauðe</hi>, V. 5. 1&ndash;2; 7. 2; 17. 2: Gen. A. 3; 5&ndash;7.

<p>Sigvatr Sturloson, p. 639. 2.

<p>Sigvatr Surtzson, L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, II. 21. 1: IV. 16. 1: Lib. 9. 7.

<p>Sigvatr (al. Sigmundr) Þórarensson, V. 16. 10.

<p>Silfr-st&oeacute;ðingar, III. 8. 6.

<p>Simon, h. of Herþrúðr, II. 6. 4.

<p>Simon Jorundarson, Cr. 10. 8.

<p>Simon enn Mikle, priest, Gm. 610.

<p>Skafte Tanna (al. Tans)son, III. 4. 2.

<p>Skafte Þóroddzson L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, IV. 9. 5: V. 9. 8; 13. 2; 16. 6: Gen. A. 16: Lib. 8. 3&ndash;4: pp. 329. 3; 366. 20; 368. 1.

<p><hi>Skage Skoftason</hi>, III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4.

<p>Skagfirðingar, Gen. A. 33.

<p>Skald-Helge Þórðarson, II. 3. 4: III. 2. 3.

<p>Skald-Hrafn Onundarson, II. 6. 4: V. 9. 8.

<p>Skald-Refr Gestsson, II. 5. 6; 5. 11: Cr. 5. 4.

<p><hi>Skalla-Grímr Kveld-Ulfsson</hi>, I. 8. 1&ndash;2; 9. 4&ndash;5: II. 4. 1&ndash;15; 15. 9; 20. 5: V. 16. 6; 16. 9; 17. 2; 17. 4.

<p>Skamkell (at Hofe), V. 7. 8.

<p>Skarð-Snorre Narfason, Gen. B. 9&ndash;10.

<p>Skarfr Hallkelsson, Gen. A. 15.

<p>Skarpheðinn, f. of Bergþóra, Gen. A. 8.

<p>Skarpheðinn Véfr&oelig;ðarson, III. 5. 15; 6. 3.

<p>Skate Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

<p>Skautaðar-Skegge, III. 2. 1: Gen. A. 37 (Skútaðar-Skegge).

<p>Skefill enn Hauk-d&oeacute;lske, V. 12. 4.

<p><hi>Skefill á Reykjastr&aolig;nd</hi>, III. 7. 2.

<p>Skegg-Ávallde Ingiallzson, III. 5. 16.

<p>Skegg-Bi&aolig;rn, Cr. 5. 2.

<p>Skegg-Brodde Biarnason, IV. 3. 1: V. 9. 1: Mant. 4. 1.

<p>Skegge Ásgautzson, V. 9. 10&ndash;11: Cr. 8. 2.

<p>Skegge Biarnason, V. 7. 9: Lib. 10. 2: p. 640. 48.

<p><hi>Skegge B&aolig;ðolfsson</hi>, III. 15. 3; 20. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Skegge Bollason, V. 2. 2.

<p>Skegge Brannzson, V. 2. 2: Gen. B. 14.

<p>Skegge Collason, II. 7. 2.

<p>Skegge, f. of Loðmundr, IV. 16. 1.

<p>Skegge Niálsson, V. 2. 2.

<p>Skegge Skammhondungr Gamlason, III. 1. 2.

<p>Skegge í Skógom, I. 7. 8.

<p>Skegge Þórarensson, II. 15. 14.

<p>Skegge Þórðarson, Cr. 2. 2.

<p>Skegge Þórgeirsson, f. of Hialte, V. 9. 9; 13. 4: Gen. B. 7.

<pb id=pb715 n=715><p>Skegge, f. of Þórsteinn Smiðr, III. 14. 12.

<p>Skegge Þórsteinsson Tialdst&oeacute;ðings, V. 8. 6.

<p><hi>Skialda-Bi&aolig;rn Herfinnzson</hi>, II. 18. 2: 28. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Skialgr á Iaðre, III. 12. 7.

<p>Skíðe enn Gamle Bárðarson, III. 6. 6; 7. 1: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 1. 1.

<p>Skíðe or Skíða-dale, III. 12. 7.

<p>Skíðe, f. of Þórgerðr, Gen. A. 32.

<p><hi>Skinna-Bi&aolig;rn Skautaðar-Skeggjason</hi>, III. 2. 1: Gen. A. 37.

<p><hi>Ski&aolig;ldolfr í Streite</hi>, IV. 11. 5.

<p><hi>Ski&aolig;ldolfr Vémundarson</hi>, IV. 3. 6.

<p>Skofte, f. of Skage í Siglo-vík, III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4.

<p>Skofte Þórðarson, II. 5. 6.

<p>Skógstrendingar, Th. 9. 3.

<p>Skógverjar, Gen. A. 8; 20; B. 14.

<p>Skorar-Geirr, see Þórgeirr Skorar-Geirr.

<p>Skúle Egilsson, Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Skúle Herkja Gunnolfsson, IV. 1. 1.

<p>Skúle Iorundarson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Skúle Rifluson, p. 639. 8; (Egilsson Hriflusonar) 641. 15.

<p>Skúle Þórsteinsson, Cr. 1. 5.

<p>Skúmr, f. of Þórkell the abbot, III. 20. 2: Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Skúmr Þróndarson, II. 4. 15.

<p>Skæringr Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 3.

<p>Skæringr Þórolfsson, V. 3. 2.

<p><hi>Sleito-</hi>(or <hi>Slétto-</hi>)<hi>Bi&aolig;rn Hróarsson</hi>, II. 15. 9; 18. 2; 22. 8; 28. 1: III. 9. 2&ndash;3; 11. 2.

<p>Sleito-Helge, II. 30. 4: III. 5. 16.

<p>Smiðkell Þórvarðarson, I. 10. 2: II. 2. 2: III. 11. 2.

<p>Smiðr Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3; 5. 13.

<p>Smið-Sturla Ceartansson, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Snerir Þóroddzson, Gen. B. 9; 11.

<p>Snertlingar, III. 16. 3.

<p>Sniallr Vatnarsson, Mant. 5. 4.

<p>Sniall-Steinn Baugsson, V. 7. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Snorre Álfsson, II. 15. 11; 21. 1.

<p>Snorre Bárðarson, Gm. 607. 612.

<p>Snorre Carlsefnesson, III. 11. 2: Lib. 305. 18: Hv. 3. 1.

<p>Snorre Goðe Þórgrímsson, II. 6. 5&ndash;6; 8. 1; 9. 3; 10. 5; 11. 6; 15. 4; 15. 14; 20. 2; 22. 8; 23. 2: III. 6. 4; Gen. A. 36; B. 13: Lib. 1. 1: p. 326. 18: Cr. 1. 2; 8. 5; 8. 10: Hv. 1. 12.

<p>Snorré Halldórsson, pp. 641. 23; 642. 5.

<p>Snorre Hlíðmanna-Goðe Eyvindarson, III. 14. 21.

<p>Snorre H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

<pb id=pb716 n=716><p>Snorre Húnbogason, L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9&ndash;10.

<p>Snorre I&aolig;rundarson, II. 19. 5; 20. 2; 23. 2.

<p>Snorre Kálfsson, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Snorré Magnússon á Melum, pp. 641. 2, 9, &amp;c.; 642. 38, 43.

<p>Snorré  Markússon  á Melum, pp. 641. 14, 21, &amp;c.; 642. 9, &amp;c.

<p>Snorre, f. of Pétr í Skógarnese, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Snorre Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Snorre Sturloson, Od. 4. 2: Ch. 635: p. 639. 2.

<p>Snorre Svertingsson, Hv. 4. 10.

<p>Snorre Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6; 12. 9.

<p>Snorre Þórðarson í Vatzfirðe, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2: Mant. 7. 1.

<p>Snorre Þórðarson Sturlosonar, II. 23. 2.

<p>Snorre Þórðarson under Felle, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Sn&aolig;rtr Hrafnsson Hlymreks-fara, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

<p>Sn&aolig;rtr Þórmóðarson, III. 16. 3.

<p><hi>Snæbi&aolig;rn Eyvindarson Austmannz</hi>, II. 26. 2.

<p>Snæbi&aolig;rn Galte Holmsteinsson, II. 26. 2&ndash;4.

<p>Snælaug H&aolig;gnadótter, Od. 3. 1; 4. 1&ndash;2: p. 641. 20, 39.

<p>Socke Þórðarson, III. 19. 3&ndash;4.

<p>S&oelig;ckolfr of Breiðabólstaðr, II. 15. 6.

<p>S&oelig;lge Hrólfsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16.

<p>Solmundr í Ásbiarnar-nese Eilífsson Arnar, II. 15. 9 b: III. 5. 13; 6. 6: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Solmundr Þórbiarnarson Iarla-kappa, V. 13. 5.

<p>Solmundr Þórolfsson, I. 6. 8.

<p>Solvar Gautakonungr (-iarl), III. 13. 2.

<p>Solve Ásólfsson, I. 7. 5.

<p>Solve Gunnsteinsson, Gen. A. 10.

<p>Solve H&aolig;gnason, II. 17. 1.

<p>Solve Hrólfsson, of Geitland, I. 11. 2: II. 17. 6.

<p>Solve Magnússon, II. 17. 6.

<p>Solve enn Prúðe Ásbrannzson, III. 3. 1.

<p>Solve í Solva-dal, II. 12. 9.

<p><hi>Solve of Solva-hamarr</hi>, II. 5. 12.

<p>Solve Þórðarson, pp. 639. 1; 640. 28.

<p>Solveíg Iónsdótter Loptzsonar, II. 22. 6.

<p>Sólv&aolig;r Ásgrímsdótter, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Sólv&aolig;r Herjolfsdótter, Gen. A. 25.

<p>Sólv&aolig;r Hundolfsdótter iarls, V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2 (Húnolfs d.).

<p>S&oelig;rkver, King of Sweden, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Sorle Brodd-Helgason, Gen. A. 26; 29.

<p><hi>Sóte under Sóta-felle</hi>, III. 3. 2.

<pb id=pb717 n=717><p>Sóte of Sóta-nes, II. 4. 3; 30. 1: III. 20. 5.

<p>S&aolig;xolfr H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

<p>Spak-B&aolig;ðvarr Ondóttzson, III. 9. 2: Cr. 1. 3; 2. 3.

<p>Stafn-Grímr Hranason, I. 10. 6.

<p>Starkaðr Barkarson under Þríhyrninge, V. 6. 3; 7. 8: Gen. A. 4; 12.

<p>Starkaðr enn Gamle, V. 13. 1.

<p>Starkaðr Þórðarson Freysgoða (?), Gen. A. 25: Nj. 364. 4.

<p>Starre í Goðd&aolig;lom, Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Starre Þórgestzson, of Holm, I. 7. 2; 11. 3.

<p>Stefnir Þórgilsson, Cr. 3. 5&ndash;6; 9. 1&ndash;2: Thorv. 7.

<p>Steigar-Þórer, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Steinarr, a follower of the sons of Ondóttr, III. 15. 2.

<p>Steinarr Onundarson, II. 4. 8.

<p>Steinbi&aolig;rn Cortr Refsson, IV. 2. 2; 3. 1.

<p>Steinbi&aolig;rn, f. of Illoge, II. 20. 9.

<p>Steinbi&aolig;rn enn Sterke Ásgeirsson, II. 3. 4.

<p>Steine Þórðarson, V. 5. 2.

<p>Steine Þórvarðzson, priest, Ch. 632.

<p><hi>Steinfiðr</hi> or <hi>Steinfinnr Reyrketilsson</hi>, V. 3. 6.

<p>Steingrímr Eyjolfsson ens Grá, II. 24. 2.

<p>Steingrímr Eyvindarson, p. 639. 14.

<p>Steingrímr Goðmundarson, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Steingrímr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Steingrímr Ornolfsson at Kroppe, III. 14. 15; 19. 1.

<p><hi>Steingrímr Trolle</hi>, II. 29. 3: Gen. B. 11.

<p>Steingrímr Þórðarson Hreðo, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Steingrímr Þórgrímsson, II. 20. 8.

<p>Steinmóðr Conalsson, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1.

<p>Steinmóðr or Diúpadal, Cr. 1. 5.

<p>Steinmóðr Olvesson Barnakarls, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Steinn Auðunnarson, II. 8. 5.

<p>Steinn Brandax- (Brands ?)son, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2&ndash;3.

... steinn Colgrímsson, I. 7. 7.

<p>Steinn enn Danske Þórgilsson, II. 20. 9.

<p>Steinn Goðmundarson, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Steinn Herdísarson, the poet, II. 9. 3.

<p>Steinn Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Steinn H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

<p><hi>Steinn Miok-siglande Vigbiodsson</hi>, II. 4. 14; 11. 8; 20. 1.

<p>Steinn enn Snialle, see Sniall-Steinn.

<p>Steinn Þórarensson, II. 15. 14.

<p>Steinn Þórðarson Freysgoða, Gen. A. 25.

<pb id=pb718 n=718><p>Steinn Þórfinnzson, I. 9. 4: II. 5. 4.

<p>Steinn Þórgestzson L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, II. 11. 8: Lib. 8. 5.

<p>Steinolfr Birtingr Einarsson, II. 20. 8.

<p>Steinolfr, neighbour of Brand frá Gnúpom, IV. 18. 2.

<p>Steinolfr (al. Steinmóðr) Gunnarsson, III. 15. 17.

<p>Steinolfr Gunnolfsson, III. 12. 8.

<p><hi>Steinolfr í Hranndal</hi>, II. 4. 13; 4. 15.

<p>Steinolfr Ingiallzson, III. 14. 4.

<p>Steinolfr enn Láge, s. of Olver Barnakarl, III. 14. 4: V. 13. 1: Mant. 5. 5.

<p><hi>Steinolfr enn Láge Hrólfsson</hi>, II. 17. 3; 18. 1&ndash;2; 18. 5; 19. 1; 30. 1: Gen. B. 9: Th. 7. 3.

<p>Steinolfr Mársson, III. 19. 4.

<p>Steinolfr Óláfsson Becks, III. 12. 6.

<p>Steinolfr Olvesson Barnakarls, see St. enn Láge.

<p>Steinolfr í Þiórsár-dale, III. 22. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Steinolfr Þórgautzson, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

<p>Steinolfr Þórkelsson Þórðarsonar, II. 22. 6.

<p>Steinr&oelig;ðr Heðinsson, III. 6. 6.

<p>&ast;<hi>Steinr&oelig;ðr Mel-patrexson</hi>, V. 16. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Steinr&oelig;ðr enn Ramme Þóresson Þursa-sprenges, III. 14. 17&ndash;18.

<p>Steinuðr, see Steinunn.

<p>Steinunn Aradótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Steinunn Bergsdótter, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Steinunn Biarnardótter, p. 641. 21, 27.

<p>Steinunn Brannzdótter, IV. 3. 7 (cf. Steinv&aolig;r).

<p>Steinunn Dalcsdótter, II. 5. 6<corr sic=" (: ">: (</corr>Cr. 5. 4).

<p><hi>Steinunn en Gamla</hi>, V. 16. 9&ndash;10.

<p>Steinunn af Hitárnese, Ch. 631.

<p>Steinunn Hrafnsdótter, II. 22. 5: pp. 639. 11; 640. 18.

<p>Steinunn Hrútzdótter, II. 4. 15; 15. 10.

<p>Steinunn Jónsdótter, p. 639. 5.

<p>Steinunn Óladótter, p. 639. 13.

<p>Steinunn Snorradótter, p. 640. 3.

<p>Steinunn Þórðardótter Oddleifssonar, m. of Hrafn Sveinbiarnarson, II. 20. 8.

<p>Steinunn Þórgrímsdótter or Borgar-h&aolig;fn, IV. 11. 8: Hv. 2. 1; 2. 8; 2. 12.

<p>Steinunn Þórgrímsdótter ens Háva, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Steinv&aolig;r Barkardótter, Gen. A. 12.

<p>Steinv&aolig;r (al. Steinunn) Brannzdótter, II. 23. 2: (IV. 3. 7).

<p>Steinv&aolig;r (al. Steinunn) Dalcsdótter, Cr. 5. 4.

<p>Steinv&aolig;r Síðo-Hallzdótter, Gen. A. 25.

<p>Steinv&aolig;r, m. of Sigvat, Ch. 637.

<pb id=pb719 n=719><p>Steinþórr Óleifsson, II. 15. 9; 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Steinþórr Þórláksson, of Eyre, II. 8. 1; 8. 5: Gen. B. 13: p. 326. 17.

<p>Stephanus, Armenian bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

<p>St&aolig;ðfirðingar, IV. 11. 1.

<p>St&aolig;rkoðr, see Starkaðr.

<p>Stórólfr H&oeacute;ngsson, V. 4. 4; 4. 7; 7. 2; 7. 4: Gen. 5.

<p>Straumfirðingar, II. 5. 8; 8. 3.

<p>Sturla Bárðarson, Gm. 607.

<p>Sturla Goðe Calmansson, I. 10. 2: II. 1. 1.

<p>Sturla Þióðreksson, see Víga-Sturla.

<p>Sturla Jónsson Petrssonar, p. 639. 4.

<p>Sturla Sigvatzson, p. 639. 3.

<p>Sturla Þórðarson enn Gamle (Hvamm-Sturla), II. 5. 8; 15. 10; 20. 2: Gen. A. 1; B. 2: Od. 5. 1: pp. 639. 2; 640. 29, &amp;c.

<p>Sturla Þórðarson L&aolig;gmaðr, the historian, V. 17. 1: Gen. B. 10.

<p>Sturlungar, III. 6. 4: V. 6. 2: Gen. A. 1; 32; B. 13.

<p>Sturlu-syner, IV. 14. 4: pp. 639. 2; 640. 29.

<p>Styrbi&aolig;rn, explorer of the Gunnbiarnarsker, II. 26. 4.

<p>Styrbi&aolig;rn Svíakappe, p. 326. 20.

<p>Styrbi&aolig;rn Þórarensson, III. 6. 6.

<p>Styrkárr Sveinbiarnarson, V. 16. 12: Ch. 636.

<p>Styrmer enn Fróðe Kárason (al. Hermundarson), V. 17. 1: Ch. 635.

<p>Styrmer Hermundarson, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Styrmer Reinsson, III. 19. 5: Cr. 10. 10: p. 641. 11.

<p>Styrmer Skeggjason, I. 7. 8.

<p>Styrmer Þórgeirsson, III. 7. 4: Gen. B. 11.

<p>Súgande Þórarensson, V. 16. 7.

<p>Sulke konungr af Roga-lande, II. 17. 3.

<p>Sumarliðe Herjolfsson, V. 4. 6&ndash;7.

<p>Sumarliðe Hrappsson, II. 15. 7.

<p>Sumarliðe Loðmundarson, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2.

<p>Sumarliðe, f. of Surtr enn Hvíte, IV. 19. 2.

<p>Sumarliðe Þórgeirsson Rauðs, II. 26. 4.

<p>Súrr, see Þórbi&aolig;rn Súrr.

<p>Surtr Atlason, II. 5. 10.

<p>Surtr Bollason, II. 15. 8.

<p>Surtr Grettisson, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Surtr enn Hvíte Skafta-stiúpr Sumarliðason, IV. 18. 2.

<p>Surtr Smiðr Goðbrannzson, II. 5. 10.

<pb id=pb720 n=720><p>Surtr Þórsteinsson, II. 21. 1: IV. 16. 1   (= Svartr Ásbiarnarson, Gen. A. 23.   Surtr Ásbiarnarson, Cr. 4. 3).

<p>Svaði á Svaðast&aolig;ðom, p. 413.

<p>Svana Herr&oelig;ðardótter, II. 8. 1.

<p>Svanlaug Þórmóðardótter, I. 11. 1.

<p>Svanr Biarnarson, II. 29. 2.

<p>Svarfd&oeacute;lar, III. 14. 6.

<p>&ast;<hi>Svart-cell</hi> of Eyre, I. 6. 5.

<p>Svarth&aolig;fðe Auðunnarson Stota, II. 8. 5.

<p>Svarth&aolig;fðe Biarnarson Goll-bera, I. 9. 1: II. 5. 7.

<p>Svarth&aolig;fðe Dufgusson, p. 639. 12.

<p>Svartkell Geirsson, I. 9. 6.

<p>Svartr Ásbiarnarson, Gen. A. 23   (see Surtr Þorsteinsson).

<p>&ast;Svartr, an Irish thrall, II. 20. 3; 20. 5.

<p>Svartr Iorondarson Goða, p. 640. 11.

<p>Svartr Ulfsson, V. 8. 7: Gen. A. 1.

<p>Sváse Iotunn, IV. 12. 1.

<p>Svegðer, early king, Lib. 306. 5.

<p>Sveinbi&aolig;rn Ásmundarson Sveinbiarnarsonar, V. 16. 12.

<p>Sveinbi&aolig;rn Ásmundarson Þórgerðarsonar, II. 4. 13.

<p>Sveinbi&aolig;rn Bárðarson ens Svarta, II. 20. 8; 22. 5.

<p>Sveinbi&aolig;rn Hrafnkelsson Goða, IV. 6. 3.

<p>Sveinbi&aolig;rn Óláfsson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Sveinbi&aolig;rn, s. of Þórbi&aolig;rg, IV. 17. 4.

<p>Sveinn Ástríðarson, King of Denmark, Io. 2. 1; 4. 1.

<p>Sveinn Bergþórsson, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Sveinn Bryggjofótr Ásláksson, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Sveinn Harallzson Tiugoskegg, King of Denmark, Lib. 7. 9: Thorv. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Sveinn Hvammz-Sturloson, Od. 5. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Sveinn Ulfsson, King of Denmark, Hv. 1. 12.

<p><hi>Sveinungr í Sveinungsvík</hi>, III. 22. 5.

<p>Sveinungr Þóresson Líno, IV. 8. 3.

<p>Sveinungr, a follower of Þorkell Trefill, II. 26. 4.

<p>Sverrer, King of Norway, Pol. 3. 2; 3. 6; 7. 2; 8. 1; 14. 5; 15. 2: Gm. 615.

<p>Svertingr Grímsson, II. 20. 2: III. 15. 5: Gen. A. 1 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Svertingr Hafr-Biarnarson, I. 10. 3: IV. 17. 4: Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Svertingr Hrolleifsson (al. Hi&aolig;rleifsson), V. 9. 8; 16. 3: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Svertingr Rúnolfsson, V. 13. 6: Cr. 6. 3; 6. B&ast;; 7. 1.

<p>Sviðo-Cáre, see Cáre S&aolig;lmundarson.

<p>Svína-Baoðvarr Caunsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16 (B&aolig;ðvarr S&aolig;lgason).

<pb id=pb721 n=721><p>Sæbi&aolig;rn (al. Snæbi&aolig;rn) Goðe Hrafnsson, V. 4. 7.

<p>Sæhildr, w. of Gizorr Hallzson. II. 23. 2: IV. 3. 7.

<p>Sæmingr, f. of Gríss, III. 5. 16.

<p>Sæmundr (Grímsson), f. of Bishop Brandr, I. 7. 8: V. 7. 6.

<p>Sæmundr Harallzson, Ch. 637.

<p>Sæmundr Jónsson í Odda Loftzsonar, Gen. B. 15: Pol. 4. 3; 6. 3; 7. 2; 7. 5: Od. 2. 1; 6. 6: Gm. 611: p. 640. 13.

<p>Sæmundr Loftzson í Odda, Gen. A. 1 <hi>n</hi>.   ( = Sæmundr Jónsson Loftzsonar).

<p>Sæmundr Sigfússon enn Fróðe, I. 2. 2; 6. 8: III. 7. 1: IV. 14. 4: V. 8. 7; 9. 1: Gen. A. 1; 13; 36; B. 10. 15: Mant. 1. 3: Lib. pr. 1; 7. 9; 9. 7; 10. 3: Cr. 10. 4; 10. 8: Hv. 2. 7; 3. 13: Pol. 1. 1: Io. 4. 4; 5. 1; 6. 2: Od. 2. 4: pp. 599, 637, 640.

<p><hi>Sæmundr enn Suðreyske í S&oelig;mundarhlíð</hi>, III. 5. 2; 5. 12; 6. 6; 7. 1&ndash;2; 8. 3; 11. 3; 12. 2: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Sæuðr Skalla-Grímsdótter, II. 4. 3; 4. 11.



<div3 id=ixT>
<head>T</head>


<p>Tanne, f. of Atle, II. 18. 1.

<p>Tanne, in Borgarfirth, Ch. 630.

<p>Tanne Torfason, II. 4. 15.

<p>Tanne (al. Tannr), s. of Þórdís, III. 4. 2.

<p>Teitr Gizorarson (al. Ketilbiarnarson), V. 12. 4.

<p>Teitr Gizorarson byscops, Hv. 2. 19: Io. 4. 5.

<p>Teitr Ísleifsson, V. 14. 2: Gen. B. 10; 15: Mant. 1. 7: Lib. 1. 1; 2. 2; 7. 1; 7. 8; 8. 1; 9. 2: Cr. 10. 1: Hv. 1. 2; 2. 20: Io. 3. 3: p. 596.

<p>Teitr Ketilbiarnarson, V. (12. 4;) 14. 3; 14. 5: Gen. A. 13&ndash;14; B. 7: Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 7. 1; 305. 9: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Teitr Oddason, Gm. 606.

<p>Teitr Tyrfingsson, IV. 15. 6.

<p>Teitr Þórbiarnarson, II. 3. 7.

<p>Teitr Þórvallzson, Ch. 635.

<p>Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, Hv. 5. 13.

<p>Tindr Hallkelsson, II. 2. 1; 6. 4; 7. 2; 13. 1.

<p>Tindr, f. of Herdís, II. 23. 2.

<p>Tinforne Æsoson, II. 16. 1.

<p>Tiorve B&aolig;ðvarsson, priest, Hv. 3. 8; 4. 10.

<pb id=pb722 n=722>

<p>Tiorve enn Háðsame, IV. 7. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Tiorve Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

<p>Tiorve Þórkelsson Langs, Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Tófa (al. Ióra), m. of Grímr, V. 12. 1.

<p>Tomas Þórarensson, Gm. 612&ndash;4.

<p>Torfe Biarnason, priest, p. 640. 39.

<p>Torfe Hamalsson, I. 3. 10.

<p>Torfe Skúmsson, II. 4. 15.

<p>Torfe Valbrannzson, I. 6. 6; 10. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Torfe Þórbrannzson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Torfe Þórgeirsson, II. 4. 14.

<p>Torf-Einarr R&aolig;gnvallzson, Earl of the Orkneys, III. 16. 1; 22. 1: IV. 14. 2: Gen. B. 7.

<p>Torráðr Osvifsson, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3: Cr. 3. 6.

<p>Trandill, see Þórkell Trandill, V. 13. 3.

<p>Trefill, see Þórkell Trefill.

<p>Tryggve, f. of Óláfr Tryggvason, II. 30. 4: III. 20. 2: Gen. B. 5&ndash;7: Mant. 2. 2; 5. 1: Lib. 7. 1, etc.

<p>Tryggve, early king, Cr. 8. 8.

<p><hi>Tungo-Cáre</hi>, III. 8. 6.

<p>Tungo-Oddr Onundarson, I. 6. 6; 7. 2; 9. 1; 10. 1&ndash;4; 11. 3: II. 2. 5; 4. 9; 15. 11; 15. 14; 26. 2&ndash;3: IV. 17. 5: V. 17. 4: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Tungo-Steinn Biarnarson, III. 8. 4; 11. 4.

<p>Tyrfingr Þórarensson, IV. 15. 6.

<p>Tyrfingr Þóresson, V. 11. 4.

<p>Tyrfingr, s. of Þóríðr (al. Halldórsson), V. 11. 4.



<div3 id=ixU>
<head>U</head>


<p>Úblauðr, see Óblauðr.

<p>Uðr, see Unnr.

<p>Ugge, f. of Ulfr Uggason, II. 7. 1.

<p>Ulbr = Kveld-Ulbr.

<p>Ulfarr, f. of Hildr (= Ormarr, I. 4. 4); V. 10. 3; 10. 5.

<p>Ulfarr Kappe, II. 11. 1&ndash;2; 11. 4: Th. 7. 1; 8. 2.

<p>Ulfarr, a freedman of Þórfinnr í Alftafirðe, II. 11. 4: Th. 8. 2.

<p>Ulfarr Ulfsson, I. 10. 1.

<p>Ulfeiðr Eyjolfsdótter, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

<p>Ulfeiðr Ingiallzdótter, III. 14. 10.

<p>Ulfheðinn Brúnason, III. 12. 4.

<p>Ulfheðinn Gunnarsson, L&aolig;g-s&aolig;gomaðr, Lib. 3. 2; 5. 3; 10. 7: Hv. 2. 20: p. 641. 43.

<p>Ulfheðinn Véfr&oelig;ðarson, III. 6. 3.

<p>Ulfheðinn á Víðe-mýre, II. 20. 8.

<p>Ulfhildr Nafar-Helgadótter, III. 12. 2.

<p>Ulfhildr, d. of Þóra <corr sic=moshals>Moshals</corr> (Hallzdótter), III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<pb id=pb723 n=723><p>Ulfkell, a thrall of Ingimundr enn Gamle, III. 5. 2.

<p>Ulfliótr the Lawgiver, I. 4. 3: III. 15. 7: IV. 13. 1&ndash;2: Gen. B. 16: Lib. 2. 2&ndash;3; 3. 1; 3. 4.

<p><hi>Ulfliótr of Langaholt</hi>, III. 7. 3.

<p>Ulfr, f. of Ásgeirr Ulfsson, V. 14. 7: Gen. A. 14.

<p>Ulfr Fitjom-skegge Þóresson, I. 10. 1.

<p><hi>Ulfr Grímsson ens Háleyska</hi>, I. 8. 2; 11. 1.

<p>Ulfr Gylðer, V. 8. 1.

<p>Ulfr Heðinsson, III. 15. 2.

<p>Ulfr frá Hóle, V. 16. 1.

<p>Ulfr enn Hvasse, V. 9. 5.

<p>Ulfr Kráka Hreiðarsson, II. 7. 1; 12. 2; 26. 1.

<p>Ulfr enn Óarge of Hrafnista, I. 8. 1.

<p>Ulfr Orgoðe I&aolig;rundarson, V. 6. 2; 8. 7; 9. 12: Gen. A. 1&ndash;2: Cr. 6. 1.

<p>Ulfr Rauðsson, I. 10. 5.

<p><hi>Ulfr enn Skiálge H&aolig;gnason ens Hvíta</hi>, II. 17. 1; 17. 3; 19. 1; 19. 4; 22. 5: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 38; B. 12.

<p><hi>Ulfr under Skratta-felle</hi>, III. 18. 3.

<p>Ulfr Uggason, II. 7. 1: Cr. 4. 4.

<p>Ulfr Úspaksson Stallare, II. 9. 3; 23. 2; 24. 1.

<p><hi>Ulfr víkingr í Ulfs-d&aolig;lom</hi>, III. 12. 5.

<p>Ulfr enn Vorske (Vorsa-Ulfr), IV. 14. 7&ndash;8.

<p>Ulfr Yxna-Þóresson, II. 12. 1; 28. 3.

<p>Ulfrún einsetukona, Gm. 610.

<p>Ulfrún en Úborna, d. of Eadmund, King of the English, I. 4. 2.

<p>Una Steinolfsdótter, V. 13. 1.

<p><hi>Une enn Danske (enn Úborne) Garðarsson</hi>, I. 2. 2: IV. 5. 2; 7. 1&ndash;2: Gen. 5.

<p>Une í Unaðs-dale, III. 5. 12; 11. 3.

<p>Unnr Álfsdótter, II. 5. 4.

<p>Unnr Eyvindardótter, see Auðr.

<p>Unnr Hákonardótter, I. 7. 7.

<p>Unnr Marðardótter Gígjo, V. 6. 2: Gen. A. 1; 3; 5.

<p>Unnr Sigmundardótter, V. 4. 7.

<p>Unnr Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Unnr Þóresdótter, II. 6. 4.

<p>Unnr Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs (?), Th. 7. 4.

<p>Úspakr, see Óspakr.

<p>Útryggr, see Ótryggr.



<div3 id=ixV>
<head>V</head>


<p>Vaðe Óláfsson Tvennumbrúna, V. 12. 3.

<p>Valbi&aolig;rg, m. of Valgerðr, Gen. A. 32.

<p>Valbrandr Eyvindarson, II. 24. 8; 26. 1.

<p>Valbrandr Valþiófsson, I. 6. 6; 9. 1; 10. 1.

<pb id=pb724 n=724><p>Valdemarr, King of Denmark, Þorl. 15. 1: Pol. 3. 4.

<p>Valdís, wife of Bishop John, Io. 12. 1.

<p>Valdís Hreinsdótter ábóta, p. 641. 11.

<p>Valdís Iólgeirsdótter, V. 4. 3.

<p>Vale enn Sterke, II. 5. 9; 7. 1; 8. 3.

<p>Valgarðr I&aolig;rundarson at Hofe, V. 4. 7 <hi>n.</hi>; 6. 2: Gen. A. 1: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Valgarðr Vémundarson, V. 3. 1.

<p>Valgarðr Ævarsson, Gen. A. 1   (= Valgarðr Vemundarson).

<p>Valgerðr Bárðardótter, V. 15. 2.

<p>Valgerðr Erlendsdótter, pp. 639. 10; 640. 10; 641. 17.

<p>Valgerðr Flosadótter, Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 4, 5, &amp;c.

<p>Valgerðr Gestzdótter, V. 13. 5.

<p>Valgerðr Hafliðadótter, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Valgerðr Ketilsdótter, p. 639. 7.

<p>Valgerðr Markúsdótter, IV. 14. 4<hi>n</hi>.: p. 640. 48.

<p>Valgerðr Rafnsdótter, p. 639, 4.

<p>Valgerðr Rúnolfsdótter, m. of Eyjolfr Valgerðarson, III. 15. 12; 19. 3&ndash;4: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 32 : Mant. 3. 1: p. 642. 3.

<p>Valgerðr Skúladótter, II. 7. 2.

<p>Valgerðr Viðarsdótter, II. 7. 2.

<p>Valgerðr Þórbrannzdótter (al. Þróndardótter) Ásbrannzsonar, Gen. A. 11.

<p>Valgerðr Þórbrannzdótter at Olfusvatne, II. 7. 2.

<p>Valgerðr Þórgilsdótter, II. 6. 4.

<p>Valgerðr Þórgilsdótter Arasonar, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Valgerðr Þóroddzdótter Dr&aoacute;po-stúfs, III. 1. 2.

<p>Valla-Brandr, s. of Aldís (al. Ásdís) Ófeigsdótter, V. 3. 7; 4. 5; 9. 1; 13. 2.

<p>Valla-Liótr Liótolfsson Goða, III. 20. 1.

<p>Vallverjar, V. 9. 5.

<p>Valr (al. Vali) Loðmundarson, IV. 16. 1; 19. 1.

<p>Valþiófr, f. of Geirþiófr, II. 22. 5.

<p>Valþiófr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

<p><hi>Valþiófr &OElig;rlygsson enn Gamle</hi>, I. 6. 4; 6. 6; 10. 1; 11. 2: II. 7. 1; 20. 6.

<p>Valþiófr á Valþiófsst&aolig;ðom, II. 12. 1.

<p>Valþyflinga-kyn, I. 6. 6.

<p>Vandráðr Osvifsson, Gen. B. 3: Cr. 3. 6.

<p>Vanlande, early king, Lib. 306. 5.

<p>Vápnfirðingar, IV. 3. 2.

<p>Vatnarr Víkarsson, Norwegian king, Mant. 5. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Vatzfirðingar, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2; 13.

<pb id=pb725 n=725><p><hi>Vébi&aolig;rn Sygna-kappe (Sygna-trauste) Végeirsson</hi>, II. 22. 7; 24. 6; 25. 1&ndash;2; 26. 5: III. 12. 8.

<p>Vébrandr Ásbrannzson, V. 13. 6.

<p>Vébrandr Hróarsson Tungo-Goða, IV. 18. 1.

<p>Veðrar-Grímr Ásason hersis, II. 14. 3; 15. 9.

<p>Veðrar-Grímr herser í Sogne, I. 4. 1: Gen. A. 13&ndash;14; 25; 32; 35; B. 7: Th. 1. 1.

<p>Védís Snartardótter, see Iódís.

<p>Védís Végeirsdótter, II. 24. 6; 25. 1&ndash;2; 26. 5.

<p>Védís (al. Valdís) Þórbrannzdótter, III. 20. 3.

<p>Veðormr Ásbiarnarson, IV. 15. 3.

<p>Vefr&oelig;ðr Ævarsson, III. 5. 15; 6. 1&ndash;3; 8. 1.

<p>Végeirr í Sogne, II. 22. 3; 22. 7; 25. 1: III. 12. 8.

<p>Végestr Biartmársson, II. 22. 3.

<p>Végestr Biartmársson (another), II. 22. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Végestr Végeirsson, II. 25. 1.

<p><hi>Vékell enn Hamramme</hi>, III. 7. 8.

<p>Vélaug, wife of Bi&aolig;rn Buna, I. 4. 1.

<p>Vélaug &OElig;rlygsdótter, I. 6. 4: II. 2. 1; 3. 1.

<p>Vélaug Víkingsdótter, Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Véleifr enn Gamle Þórgeirsson, I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3; 15. 9; 30. 1.

<p>Véleifr, f. of Þórolfr (= Véleifr enn Gamle?), III. 22. 3.

<p><hi>Vémundr í Fáskrúðs-firðe</hi>, IV. 10. 8.

<p>Vémundr enn Gamle Víkingsson, I. 4. 1: IV. 4. 2: V. 10. 4; 15. 1: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Vémundr Hrólfsson H&oelig;ggvanda, IV. 17. 1.

<p>Vémundr Kogor Þóresson, III. 17. 2.

<p>Vémundr Loðmundarson, IV. 19. 3.

<p>Vémundr Orðlo-kar Þórolfsson, V. 3. 1: Gen. A. 1; B. 16 (Iarðlokar).

<p>Vémundr, f. of Skioldolfr and Berðlo-Káre, IV. 3. 6.

<p>Vémundr Smiðr Sigmundarson Cleykess, IV. 17. 2.

<p>Vémundr Végeirsson, II. 25. 1.

<p>Véný Þórsteinsdótter Oddleifssonar, II. 21. 1.

<p>Vermundr enn Mióve Þórgrímsson, II. 7. 6; 7. 8; 9. 4; 11. 7; 15. 9 b; 23. 2: Gen. B. 2; 10 (Vémundr); 13.

<p>Vermundr Þengilsson, III. 16. 2.

<p>Vestarr H&oeacute;ngsson, V. 4. 5; 4. 7.

<p>Vestarr Óleifsson, IV. 16. 2.

<p>Vestarr, f. of Þórgeirr, IV. 5. 1.

<pb id=pb726 n=726><p><hi>Vestarr Þórolfsson Bloðro-skalla</hi>, II. 8. 1; 17. 6; 20. 9; Th. 7. 2.

<p><hi>Vésteinn Végeirsson</hi>, II. 22. 3; 7&ndash;8; 23. 1;  25. 1.

<p>Vésteinn Vésteinsson, II. 22. 3; 22. 7; 23. 1: p. 319. 6.

<p>Vestfirðingar, Th. 10. 4: Cr. 8. 10.

<p>Vestliðe Cetilsson, II. 15. 2.

<p>Vestmaðr, b. of Vémundr, III. 22. 1.

<p><hi>Vestmarr í Reykjar-dal</hi>, III. 18. 3.

<p>Vestmarr Þórsteinsson ens Skialga, IV. 14. 9.

<p><hi>Vetrliðe Arinbiarnarson</hi>, IV. 8. 1.

<p>Vetrliðe Skáld Sumarliðason, V. 4. 6&ndash;7: Cr. 4. 4.

<p>Véþormr Végeirsson, II. 25. 1.

<p>Véþormr Vémundarson, IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1.

<p>Véþ&aolig;rn Végeirsson, II. 25. 1.

<p>Viðarr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

<p>Viðarr, f. of Valgerðr, II. 7. 3.

<p>Víðcunnr Ioansson, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Viðfirðingar, IV. 10. 4.

<p>Vífill (Vívill) Ketilsson, a freedman of Auðr diúpauðga, II. 4. 13; 6. 5; 12. 2; 15. 4.

<p>Vífill á Vífils-toftom, II. 16. 1.

<p>Vífill, a thrall of Ingolfr Arnarson, I. 3. 7&ndash;8.

<p>Víga-Barðe Goðmundarson, II. 15. 9 b: III. 6. 6: Gen. B. 2; 13.

<p>Víga-Biarne, see Biarne Brodd-Helgason, IV. 3. 1: Mant. 5. 6: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Víga-Glúmr Eyjolfsson, III. 9. 2; 14. 4; 14. 20; 21. 2: Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Víga-Hrappr, see Hrappr Helgason.

<p>Víga-Scúta Áskelsson, III. 19. 1; 19. 4: IV. 14. 10.

<p>Víga-Sturla Þióðreksson, II. 18. 2; 20.  2; 23. 2; 28. 1: Gen. B. 13: Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Víga-Styrr Þórgrímsson, II. 7. 5&ndash;6; 9. 4; 12. 2; 15. 1; 15. 8: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Vígbiodr B&aolig;ðmóðsson, II. 4. 14; 11. 8.

<p>Vígdís Ásólfsdótter Flosa, II. 15. 13.

<p>Vígdís Auðunnardótter Rotins, III. 15. 8.

<p>Vígdís Bárðardótter, II. 7. 2.

<p>Vígdís Conalsdótter, III. 18. 3; 19. 4.

<p>Vígdís Geirsdótter, p. 641. 5.

<p>Vígdís, w. of Ingimundr iarl, III. 5. 1.

<p>Vígdís Óláfsdótter, Thorv. 5.

<p>Vígdís Óleifsdótter Feilans, II. 15. 14.

<p>Vígdís Steinsdótter Danska, II. 20. 9.

<p>Vígdís Svertingsdótter, II. 20. 2: Gen. 1: p. 640. 32.

<pb id=pb727 n=727><p>Vígdís Þórarensdótter Fylsennis, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14; 18. 1.

<p>Vígdís Þórarensdótter Ragabróður, II. 15. 14.

<p>Vígdís Þóresdótter Þegjanda, III. 5. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Vígdís Þóresdótter Hámundarsonar, III. 15. 6; 21. 2.

<p>Vígdís Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 14. 1; 15. 11.

<p>Vígdís [Þórgils ?]dótter, II. 20. 9.

<p>Vígfúss Biarnarson í Drápuhlíð, II. 9. 3: Th. 7. 3; 8. 3.

<p>Vígfúss Eyjolfsson, III. 14. 4; 21. 1.

<p>Vígfúss Gunnsteinsson, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Vígfúss í Hlíð, see Sigfúss.

<p>Vigfúss Sigurðarson, Gen. B. 6.

<p>Vígfúss Víga-Glúmsson, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Vígfúss Víkinga-Kárason, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Vígsterkr, f. of B&aolig;ðvar, II. 20. 3; 27. 1.

<p>Víkarr Harallzson, Norwegian king, Mant. 5. 3.

<p>Víkinga-Káre Sigurðarson Bióða-skalla, III. 14. 4: V. 14. 5: Gen. A. 13&ndash;17: B. 6 (Eymundarson Askaspilles), 7: Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

<p>Víkingr Skáneyjar-skelmer, V. 10. 4.

<p>Víkingr (Haraldr enn Hárfagre ?), f. of Þórðr and Onundr, II. 20. 8; 23. 2; 24. 4: V. 17. 2.

<p>&ast;<hi>Vilbaldr Dufþacsson</hi> (al. Dofnialsson), IV. 17. 5; 18. 3.

<p>Vilbaldus, Count of Bremen, Cr. 3. 1.

<p>Vilborg Arnoddzdótter, III. 12. 6.

<p>Vilborg Gizorardótter, I. 11. 2: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Vilborg Iódísardótter, pp. 641. 1, 8; 642. 37, 43.

<p>Vilborg, d. of King Ósvaldr, I. 4. 2.

<p>Vilgeirr Biarnarson Austræna, II. 9. 3.

<p>Vilgerðr H&aolig;rða-Káradótter, I. 2. 3: III. 11. 5.

<p>Vilgeirr Óttarsson, Th. 7. 3.

<p>Vilhialmr I and II, Kings of England, Hv. 2. 20.

<p>Vilmundr, abbot, Io. 12. 5: p. 592.

<p>Visburr, early king, Lib. 306. 6.

<p>Vívill, see Vífill.

<p><hi>V&aolig;lo-Steinn, son Þórríðar Sundafylles</hi>, II. 18. 3; 24. 2; 24. 5.

<p>Vorsar, IV. 14. 7.

<p>Væpnlingar, IV. 11. 3.



<div3 id=ixY>
<head>Y</head>


<p>Yngvarr, early king, Lib. 306. 9.

<p>Yngvarr, f. of Bera, II. 4. 1; 4. 12; 20. 5.

<pb id=pb728 n=728><p>Yngve, King of the Turks, Lib. 306. 4 and 7.

<p>Yngvildr Álfsdótter, Gen. B. 11.

<p>Yngvildr Allra-syster Hámundardótter Heljar-skinnz, III. 14. 15; 15. 9.

<p>Yngvildr Atladótter, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

<p>Yngvildr Auðolfsdótter, III. 14. 19.

<p>Yngvildr Biarnadótter, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Yngvildr Gunnarsdótter, III. 15. 7.

<p>Yngvildr Hallzdótter, p. 641. 29.

<p>Yngvildr Hauksdótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Yngvildr Ketilsdóttir, I. 4. 5: II. 9. 1: III. 13. 3: Th. 1. 1.

<p>Yngvildr Narfadótter, Gen. B. 10: p. 642. 10.

<p>Yngvildr Ormsdótter, Cr. 1. 5.

<p>Yngvildr Rauðkinn Ásgeirsdótter, III. 14. 6.

<p>Yngvildr Síðo-Hallzdótter, III. 21. 2: IV. 14. 4<hi>n.</hi>: Gen. B. 10; 15.

<p>Yngvildr Steingrímsdótter, see Yngvildr Þorgrímsdótter.

<p>Yngvildr Steinr&oelig;ðardótter, III. 6. 6.

<p>Yngvildr Vermundardótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Yngvildr Þórðardótter, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Yngvildr Þórgeirsdótter, w. of Þórgeirr Eiríksson, III. 8. 1.

<p>Yngvildr Þórgeirsdótter Vífilssonar, II. 6. 5; 15. 4.

<p>Yngvildr Þórgrímsdótter Digr-Ketilssonar, IV. 14. 4.

<p>Yngvildr Þórgrímsdótter Eyjolfssonar, II. 20. 8.

<p>Yngvildr Þórkelsdótter Fullspaks (= Yngvildr Ævarsdótter ?), Gen. A. 27.

<p>Yngvildr Ævarsdótter ens Gamla, IV. 8. 1: p. 642. 49.

<p>Yxna-Þórer, I. 2. 2: II. 12. 1; 28. 3: III. 8. 2; 14. 20&ndash;21: IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28; B. 3: Mant. 5. 6.

<p>Ýr Geirmundardótter, I. 11. 4: II. 17. 6; 20. 2; 20. 4; 20. 6; 27. 1: Gen. B. 2; 8: Mant. 277.



<div3 id=ixTh>
<head>Þ</head>


<p>Þangbrandr, the priest, V. 4. 6: Lib. 7. 1; 9. 9: Cr. 3. 1.

<p><hi>Þengill Miok-siglande</hi>, III. 16. 2.

<p>Þiðrande, f. of Eirný, II. 18. 1.

<p>Þiðrande Geitesson, Gen. A. 19.

<p>Þiðrande Ketilsson (enn Spake), IV. 4. 2; 8. 1; 12. 2; 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; 27.

<p>Þiðrande Síðo-Hallzson, Gen. A. 19: pp. 418&ndash;9.

<p>Þióðarr Friðleifsson, III. 11. 4.

<p>Þióðgerðr Coðransdótter, III. 11. 5.

<pb id=pb729 n=729><p>Þióðgerðr Flókadótter, III. 11. 5.

<p>Þióðhildr Eyvindardótter Austmannz, II. 23. 2.

<p>Þióðhildr I&aolig;rundardótter, II. 12. 1; 19. 4.

<p>Þióðhildr Þórkelsdótter Fullspaks, IV. 8. 1.

<p>Þióðolfr (al. Þórolfr) enn Fróðe, III. 20. 1.

<p>Þióðolfr Goðe Eilífsson Arnar, III. 6. 6.

<p>Þióðolfr or H&aolig;fn, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3 (enn Láge).

<p>Þióðolfr or Hvíne, Mant. 5. 4.

<p>Þióðolfr Karlason, II. 1. 2.

<p><hi>Þióðrekr í Bero-firðe</hi>, IV. 11. 6.

<p>Þióðrekr Sleito-Biarnarson, II. 18. 2&ndash;3; 23. 2; 24. 1; 28. 1: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þióðrekr Þióðreksson, II. 18. 2; 28. 1.

<p>Þiórsd&oeacute;ler, III. 22. 4.

<p>Þióstarr á Alftanese, I. 7. 1; 11. 3: II. 17. 6; 20. 6: IV. 17. 4: V. 7. 2: Gen. B. 8.

<p>Þióstólfr Biarnarson, I. 6. 4; 9. 1.

<p>Þóra Biarnardótter Enska, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þóra Borgar-hi&aolig;rtr Herraðardótter, Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Þóra Eyjolfsdótter (al. Nesia-Cniúcs d.), II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

<p>Þóra Gísladótter, II. 23. 2.

<p>Þóra Guðmundardótter Gríss, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þóra, m. of Guðmundr Gríss, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þóra (al. Þóríðr) Gunnsteinsdótter, II. 22. 5.

<p>Þóra Harallzdótter Gollskeggs, V. II. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Þóra Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 15. 7: Gen. B. 16.

<p>Þóra H&aolig;rða-Káradótter, I. 4. 3: IV. 13. 1: Gen. B. 16.

<p>Þóra Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs, V. 7. 9.

<p>Þóra Magnússdótter Berf&oeacute;tts, Pol. 1. 1; p. 640. 12.

<p>Þóra Mosháls Auðunnardótter, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Þóra Óleifsdótter Feilans, II. 10. 5; 15. 14: Gen. A. 36: Th. 9. 1; 11. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þóra Olvesdótter, V. 11. 2.

<p>Þóra Pólsdótter, Pol. 1. 8; 9. 2; 10. 1.

<p>Þóra Sigurðardótter Orms-í-Auga, Gen. A. 35&ndash;6; B. 12: Th. 1. 4.

<p>Þóra Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þóra Steinsdótter Brandaxsonar, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Þóra Vestarsdótter af Eyre, II. 20. 9.

<p>Þóra, w. of Þórkell Ásgeirsson, I. 5. 1.

<p>Þóra Þórsteinsdótter Holmunz, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2.

<p>Þóra Þórsteinsdótter ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1.

<pb id=pb730 n=730><p>Þóralfr enn Sterke Þórgeirsson, III. 14. 16.

<p>Þórarenn Ásbiarnarson Loðinh&aolig;fða, IV. 5. 4: Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Þórarenn Atlason ens Ramma, III. 6. 6.

<p>Þórarenn Blinde Þórvarðzson, I. 8. 3.

<p>Þórarenn B&aolig;ðmóðsson, V. 16. 7.

<p>Þórarenn Brannzson, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Þórarenn bryte á Hólom, Gm. 609.

<p>Þórarenn Colsson, II. 8. 2.

<p>Þórarenn Corne Grímkelsson, II. 7. 1.

<p>Þórarenn Dagsson, III. 21. 2.

<p>Þórarenn Egilsson, IV. 2. 2.

<p>Þórarenn Erlingsson, V. 16. 10.

<p>Þórarenn Falkason, p. 642. 1.

<p>Þórarenn Finnason, IV. 1. 2.

<p>Þórarenn Fylsenne Þórðarson, II. 15. 14; 18. 1: Cr. 2. 2.

<p>Þórarenn Giallande, II. 18. 3.

<p>Þórarenn Glúmsson, I. 6. 5; 10. 4.

<p>Þórarenn Goðe Þórgilsson Giallande, III. 4. 1.

<p>Þórarenn Hafrsson, III. 12. 1.

<p>Þórarenn Hallkelsson, II. 2. 1.

<p>Þórarenn enn Illi Steinolfsson, I. 11. 3: III. 14. 4.

<p>Þórarenn Ingiallzson, II. 17. 4: III. 21. 3.

<p><hi>Þórarenn Krókr</hi>, II. 18. 5.

<p>Þórarenn, foster-son of Liótr enn Spake, II. 24. 2.

<p>Þórarenn Nefjulfsson, Cr. 6. 3; 6. B&ast;.

<p>Þórarenn Olvesson, IV. 18. 3; 18. 6.

<p>Þórarenn Ozorarson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Þórarenn Ragabróðer Áleifsson, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14: Gen. A. 18; B. 1: Lib. 3. 5; 5. 4; 10. 2.

<p>Þórarenn Skeggjason, Lib. 10. 2.

<p>Þórarenn Roste Há-Snorrason, II. 29. 3.

<p>Þórarenn Smiðkelsson, II. 2. 2.

<p>Þórarenn enn Spake Þórvallzson, III. 6. 4.

<p>Þórarenn, f. of Steinn at Rauðamel, II. 15. 14.

<p>Þórarenn enn Svarte Þórólfsson Máfhlíðingr, II. 7. 5&ndash;6; 7. 8; 11. 5: Th. 8. 3.

<p>Þórarenn Sælingr Þóresson, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Þórarenn Þórbiarnarson, V. 12. 1.

<p>Þórarenn Þóresson á Espihóle, III. 15. 6.

<p>Þórarenn Þórgeirsson, II. 5. 14.

<p>Þórarenn Þórgilsson ok Þóreyjar Gestzdóttur, II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórarenn Þórgilsson at Búrfelle, II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

<p>Þórarenn Þórgilsson Cnappa, II. 4. 15.

<p><hi>Þórarenn Þórkelsson</hi>, V. 10. 6.

<p>Þórarenn Þórkelsson Skota-Collz, V. 13. 4: Hv. 3. 1.

<pb id=pb731 n=731><p>Þórarenn Þórsteinsson Surtz, II. 20. 1.

<p>Þórarna Ásgeirsdótter, II. 15. 7.

<p>Þórarna Ingolfsdótter, II. 21. 4.

<p>Þórarna Ketilsdótter Ilbreiðs, II. 17. 4; 18. 6; 21. 6.

<p>Þórarna Sigvatzdótter (al. Sigmundardótter), V. 16. 10.

<p>Þórarna Þóroddzdótter Hialms, III. 11. 2.

<p>Þórarna Þróndardótter Mióbeins, II. 18. 7: III. 15. 10.

<p>Þórbeiner á Þórbeinesst&aolig;ðom, Th. 8. 3.

<p>Þórbergr Corna-múle Þórkelsson, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4.

<p>Þórbergr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p><hi>Þórbergr í Langa-dal</hi>, II. 11. 7&ndash;8 (13. 1 called Hróarr).

<p>Þórbergr Óleifsson, II. 15. 9.

<p>Þórbergr Þórvallzson Holbarka, IV. 5. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg B&oeacute;jar-bót Ásgeirsdótter, III. 4. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Catla Helgadótter Skarfs, I. 6. 8: II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Colbrún Glúmsdótter, II. 20. 8.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Digra Óleifsdótter, II. 15. 9: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Hákonardótter, IV. 3. 5.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Holmasól Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 14. 3; 15. 3; 20. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg  Hrólfsdótter, s. of Steinolfr enn Láge, II. 19. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Ketilsdótter ens Fíflska,  IV. 16. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Knarrar-bringa Gilsdótter Skeiðar-nefs, II. 12. 1; 18. 7; 19. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg, w. of Loptr Byscopsson, IV. 5. 2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg, d. of Miðfiarðar-Skegge, II. 2. 4; 15. 3: III. 2. 3.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Onundardótter, III. 20. 5.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg St&aolig;ng, II. 4. 7.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Svertingsdótter, IV. 17. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg, m. of Þórðr Illoge the younger, IV. 14. 10.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Þórsteinsdótter ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rg Þórfinnzdótter, II. 11. 3.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn, f. of Arnmóðr enn Rauðe, II. 21. 3.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Arnbiarnarson</hi>, II. 3. 7; 8. 2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Arngrímsson á Framnese, V. 11. 3.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Arnmóðarson  ens Rauða, II. 21. 3.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Arnórsson Hýnefs, III. 1. 2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Arnþiófsson, V, 16. 10.

<pb id=pb732 n=732><p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Bitra</hi>, II. 29. 5.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn, f. of Bitro-Odde (cf. Þórvaldr Orgoðe), Gen. B. 11.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Blese of Blesa-staðer</hi>, II. 3. 8.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Brúnason at Steinom, II. 3. 9.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Colcan</hi>, III. 5. 17.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Collr Valþiófsson, I. 6. 6.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Crumr of Crums-hólar, II. 4. 6.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Crumr Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn enn Digre Ormsson ens Mióva, II. 7. 2; 7. 5&ndash;6; 22. 8.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Einarsson, II. 15. 2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Eyvindarson Vápna, IV. 2. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn enn Gaulverske Ormarsson, I. 4. 4: V. 6. 2; 9. 1; 10. 1&ndash;3.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Geirmundarson, V. 2. 2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Glora, II. 12. 9.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Graut-Atlason, IV. 4. 3; 5. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn enn Haukd&oelig;lske Biarnarson, II. 12. 1 (= <corr sic="Þorbi&aolig;rn">Þórbi&aolig;rn</corr> at Vatne?).

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Hraðason, I. 7. 8.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Iarla-kappe</hi>, V. 13. 2; 13. 5.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Ísr&oelig;ðarson, II. 3. 3.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn enn Kvirre Ófeigsson, V. 3. 4.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Laxa-karl</hi>, V. 13. 1&ndash;3.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Loke B&aolig;ðmóðsson</hi>, II. 20. 2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Narfason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Oddason, p. 641. 31.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Ongull Þórðarson, III. 11. 2: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Osvifsson, II. 9. 3.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Ozorarson, V. 12. 1.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Scuma B&aolig;ðvarsson</hi>, I. 6. 2: II. 21. 5.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Skagason, III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Skage, III. 19. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Skialda-Biarnarson, II. 18. 2; 28. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Skrofuðr Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Sp&aolig;rr B&aolig;ðvarsson</hi>, I. 6. 2 (= Þórolfr Sp&aolig;rr ?).

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn enn Sterke, II. 26. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Strúgr Ævarsson, III. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Súrr, II. 7. 5; 17. 4; 22. 7: Gen. A. 36.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Svarte</hi>, I. 8. 3.

<p><hi>Þórbi&aolig;rn Talcne B&aolig;ðvarsson</hi>, I. 6. 2: II. 18. 6; 21. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Tyrfingsson, the priest, V. II. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn at Vatne, II. 15. 8; 15. 9   (= <corr sic="Þorbi&aolig;rn">Þórbi&aolig;rn</corr> enn Haukdælske Biarnarson ?).

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Vífilsson, II. 4. 13; 6. 4; 12. 2; 15. 4.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Þióðreksson, II. 18. 2; 23. 2; 24. 1&ndash;2; 26. 1; 28. 1.

<pb id=pb733 n=733><p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Þiótr, III. 12. 8.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Þórkelsson, Cr. 6. 1.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Þórvallzson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Þórbi&aolig;rn Þynna Hrómundarson, II. 30. 3&ndash;4: III<corr>.</corr> 5. 16.

<p>Þórbrandr Ásbrannzson, Gen. A. 11.

<p>Þórbrandr í Alftafirðe Þórfinnzson (al. Vébrandzson), II. 8. 1; 11. 3; 11. 6; 12. 2: Th. 7. 1; 8. 2; 9. 3.

<p>Þórbrandr í D&aolig;lom, III. 6. 5.

<p>Þórbrandr Harallzson, III. 3. 1.

<p>Þórbrandr at Olfusvatne, II. 7. 2.

<p><hi>Þórbrandr Orrecr</hi>, III. 8. 7.

<p>Þórbrandr at Rauða-skriðo, f. of Védís and Hallgils, III. 20. 3; 20. 5.

<p>Þórbrandr í Skarfa-nese, III. 11. 2.

<p><hi>Þórbrandr Þórbiarnarson ens Óarga</hi>, V. 13. 6.

<p>Þórdís, d. of Arnkatla, IV. 19. 4.

<p>Þórdís Biarnardótter, III. 11. 2.

<p>Þórdís Bótolfsdótter, pp. 640. 35; 641. 5, &amp;c.

<p>Þórdís Caðalsdótter, III. 15. 6.

<p>Þórdís Einarsdótter, II. 15. 2.

<p>Þórdís, Eyversk kona, Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Þórdís Flosadótter, p. 640. 8, 21.

<p>Þórdís Goðlaugsdótter, II. 5. 8; 15. 10; 20. 2.

<p>Þórdís Goðmundardótter ens Ríka, Gen. A. 26.

<p>Þórdís Halldórsdótter, w. of Skald-Helge, III. 2. 3.

<p>Þórdís Helgadótter Skarfs (al. Skrafs), II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórdís Iarlsdótter, see Þórdís R&aolig;gnvallzdótter.

<p>Þórdís, d. of Ióra, II. 4. 2.

<p>Þórdís Ingimundardótter ens Gamla, III. 5. 2&ndash;3; 5. 10.

<p>Þórdís en Mikla Þórgeirsdótter, V. 9. 2; 9. 7.

<p>Þórdís (al. Þórríðr) Óleifsdótter Feilans, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14.

<p>Þórdís Ozorardótter Keileselgs, IV. 12. 2; 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 10: Lib. 305. 12.

<p>Þórdís R&aolig;gnvallzdótter Mæra-iarls, IV. 14. 10.

<p>Þórdís Síðo-Hallzdótter, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Þórdís Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13&ndash;14.

<p>Þórdís Snorradótter I&aolig;rundarsonar, II. 23. 2.

<p>Þórdís spákona, Thorv. 1.

<p>Þórdís Súrsdótter, II. 7. 5; 22. 8: Gen. A. 36.

<p>Þórdís Svarth&aolig;fðadótter, I. 9. 1: II. 5. 7.

<pb id=pb734 n=734><p>Þórdís Torf-Einarsdótter, III. 22. 1.

<p>Þórdís Yngvarsdótter, II. 4. 12; 20. 5.

<p>Þórdís Þióðolfsdótter, w. of Osvifr Spake, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Þórdís Þórbiarnardótter, II. 7. 2.

<p>Þórdís Þórðardótter Illoga, IV. 14. 10.

<p>Þórdís Þórfinnzdótter (= Þóríðr Þórfinnzdótter, II. 4. 3), II. 4. 11.

<p>Þórdís Þórgeirsdótter Suðo, II. 19. 5.

<p>Þórdís Þórhaddzdótter, II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

<p>Þórdís Þórkelsdótter Þialfa, V. 9. 11.

<p>Þórdís Þóroddzdótter, Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Þórdís Þórolfsdótter, II. 4. 1.

<p>Þórdís Þórsteinsdótter Surtz, II. 20. 1.

<p>Þórdís Þórvallzdótter, III. 6. 4.

<p>Þórdís Þórvarðzdótter Síðo-Hallzsonar, IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 10; 15.

<p>Þórðr Báreksson, V. 5. 2.

<p>Þórðr Barkarson, I. 7. 1.

<p>Þórðr Beigalde, see Þórer B.

<p>Þórðr Bialke, III. 15. 11.

<p>Þórðr Blígr Þórláksson, II. 8. 1; II. 6.

<p>Þórðr B&aolig;ðvarsson, priest, Od. 3. 2; 4. 1, &amp;c.: p. 639. 9.

<p>Þórðr B&aolig;ðvarsson (grandson of prec.), pp. 639. 9; 640. 49; 641<corr sic=",">.</corr> 6.

<p>Þórðr Brúnason ens Hvíta, III. 12. 4.

<p>Þórðr Conalsson, III. 19. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þórðr Dofne (Domne) Atlason, V. 11. 2; 12. 2.

<p>Þórðr Erra, II. 3. 8.

<p>Þórðr Eyjolfsson, III. 1. 2.

<p>Þórðr Eysteinsson Meinfrets, II. 15. 7; 15. 11: III. 1. 1.

<p>Þórðr Freys-goðe Ozorarson, IV. 15. 3; 18. 1; 18. 6: V. 7. 4: Gen. A. 10; 25; B. 15: Nj. 364. 5: Cr. 1. 2; 6. 3; 6. B&ast;; 7. 1.

<p>Þórðr Geller Óleifsson Feilans, II. 2. 5; 10. 4&ndash;5; 11. 7&ndash;8; 12. 2; 14. 8; 15. 11; 15. 14: III. 2. 3; 11. 2: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 37; B. 1; 4: Th. 9. 1; 10. 1&ndash;4: Lib. 5. 1&ndash;2; 305. 17; 306. 17.

<p>Þórðr Gestzson Oddleifssonar, II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórðr Gilsson, f. of Hvamm-Sturla, II. 5. 8; 15. 9 b-10; 20. 2; 23. 2: Gen. B. 2; 10: Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Þórðr Gizorarson, Hv. 2. 19.

<p><hi>Þórðr Gnúpa Oddzson</hi>, II. 5. 6.

<p>Þórðr Hafliðason, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Þórðr Halldórsson, Gen. B. 15.

<p><hi>Þórðr Halme</hi> (? = Þórðr Þvare), IV. 3. 3.

<p>Þórðr Helgason, II. 3. 4.

<p>Þórðr Hesth&aolig;fðe Snorrason, III. 11. 2: Lib. 305. 17.

<p>Þórðr Hialtason, III. 10. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórðr frá H&aolig;fða, see H&aolig;fða-Þórðr.

<pb id=pb735 n=735><p>Þórðr Hísinga-skalle (Hreða) H&aolig;rða-Kárason, Gen. B. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Þórðr Hvíte (or Orvond) Þórvallzson, II. 23. 2.

<p>Þórðr Illoge Eyvindarson, IV. 14. 4; 14. 10(= Illoge Fellz-goðe).

<p>Þórðr Illoge Þóresson Flatnefs (Þórðr Illoge the younger), IV. 14. 10.

<p>Þórðr Ingunnarson (s. of Glúmr Geirason), II. 15. 8: III. 21. 3.

<p>Þórðr Kause Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p><hi>Þórðr Knappr</hi>, III. 12. 1.

<p>Þórðr K&aolig;ttr Þórðarson, II. 9. 3; 15. 8.

<p>Þórðr Kráko-nef, II. 21. 1: Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórðr Lambe, I. 6. 6.

<p>Þórðr Leggjalde Molda-Gnúpsson, IV. 17. 3.

<p>Þórðr Leysingjason, Gen. A. 9.

<p>Þórðr Magnússon, pp. 639. 1; 640. 28.

<p>Þórðr Mikill Ævarsson, III. 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórðr í Múla, s. of Arndís Auðga, II. 18. 1; 30. 2: Gen. B. 9.

<p>Þórðr Narfason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórðr Oddleifsson, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórðr Ornolfsson, III. 14. 15.

<p>Þórðr Orvond Þórvallzson, II. 23. 2.

<p>Þórðr Rafnsson at Stockahl&aolig;ðom, III. 16. 1.

<p>Þórðr Skáld Colbeinsson, II. 5. 4; 15. 11.

<p>Þórðr Skapl, III. 9. 2; 10. 1.

<p>Þórðr Skatason, II. 15. 7.

<p><hi>Þórðr Skegge Hrappsson</hi>, I. 4. 2&ndash;4: III. 8. 1: IV. 13. 1: V. 14. 1: Gen. A. 13&ndash;14; B. 7.

<p>Þórðr Skúlason, pp. 639. 8; 641. 16.

<p><hi>Þórðr Slítande</hi>, III. 14. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Þórðr Snorrason, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Þórðr Solvason Þórðarsonar, pp. 639. 1; 640. 28.

<p>Þórðr Solvason Hrólfssonar of Reykjaholt, I. 11. 2: II. 17. 6: Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Þórðr Steinolfsson, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þórðr Sturluson Þióðrekssonar, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 13: Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Þórðr Sturluson í Hvamme, Gen. B. 10: pp. 639. 2; 640. 40.

<p>Þórðr Vagg-agðe, V. 15. 1.

<p>Þórðr Valgerðarson, p. 639. 7.

<p>Þórðr Vermundarson, Gm. 610&ndash;13.

<p>Þórðr Vífilsson, II. 16. 2.

<p><hi>Þórðr Víkingsson</hi>, II. 20. 8; 23. 2; 24. 4: V. 17. 2.

<p>Þórðr, f. of Yngvildr, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórðr Þórgeirsson Þórðarsonar, III. 15. 11.

<pb id=pb736 n=736><p>Þórðr Þórgeirsson Cengs, II. 11. 5.

<p>Þórðr Þórgeirsson Lamba, II. 4. 12; 20. 5.

<p>Þórðr Þórkelsson, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þórðr Þórsteinsson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórðr Þórsteinsson ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Þórðr Þórvallzson í Vatz-firðe, II. 15. 9 b: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 2: Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Þórðr (al. Þórer) Þurs, II. 4. 7.

<p><hi>Þórðr Þvare Þórolfsson Halma</hi>, IV. 3. 7.

<p>Þórðr Þvare Þórólfsson Þórðarsonar, IV. 3. 7.

<p>Þórelfr Alfsdótter, II. 15. 11.

<p>Þórer, archbishop in Norway, Pol. 3. 3; 13. 2&ndash;3.

<p><hi>Þórer Ásason</hi>, V. 11. 4.

<p>Þórer (al. Þórðr) Beigalde, II. 4. 6.

<p>Þórer Brannzson, V. 16. 2.

<p>Þórer Broddason, Hv. 2. 1.

<p>Þórer Croppinskegge, Lib. 3. 2.

<p>Þórer Drífa Óláfsson, V. 12. 3.

<p><hi>Þórer Dúfonef</hi>, III. 8. 8&ndash;9.

<p>Þórer, f. of Eymundr Askaspiller, Gen. B. 6.

<p>Þórer Goðlaus Ormarsson, I. 4. 4.

<p>Þórer Graut-Atlason, IV. 3. 1; 3. 3; 4. 3: Gen. A. 28.

<p><hi>Þórer Grímsson Gráfeldarmúla</hi>, III. 18. 1.

<p><hi>Þórer Grímsson</hi>, see Sel-Þórer.

<p>Þórer Gunnlaugsson (al. Ketilsson) í Hefni, I. 8. 1: III. 5. 1.

<p>Þórer Gunnolfsson, III. 12. 8.

<p>Þórer Hafrs-þió Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3; 5. 13.

<p>Þórer Haklangr, III. 5. 2.

<p>Þórer Halldórsson, II. 13. 1.

<p>Þórer Hámundarson Heljarskinns, á Espihóle, III. 14. 10; 15. 6; 21. 2: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 277.

<p>Þórer Hauknefr, herser, IV. 1. 1.

<p><hi>Þórer Haustmyrkr Vigbiodsson</hi>, II. 11. 8: V. 16. 7.

<p><hi>Þórer enn Háve í Crossavík</hi>, IV. 10. 5.

<p>Þórer Helgason, III. 15. 10.

<p>Þórer herser Hroallzson, II. 2. 1.

<p>Þórer, s. of Hildr Ásbiarnardótter, IV. 16. 1.

<p>Þórer Hima, III. 11. 1.

<p>Þórer Hlamande, f. of Ulfr Fitjomskegge, I. 10. 1.

<p>Þórer Hrafnkelsson, IV. 6. 3: Gen. A. 30.

<p>Þórer Hundr, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þórer iarl á Vermalande, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Þórer Kárason Túlkara, Gen. B. 5.

<pb id=pb737 n=737><p>Þórer Keilis-múle B&aolig;ðolfsson, III. 15. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þórer Ketilsson, h. of Ástríðr Mannvizbrecka, IV. 7. 3; 18. 2.

<p>Þórer Leðr-hals Þórsteinsson, III. 17. 2; 19. 1.

<p><hi>Þórer Lína í Breiðavík</hi>, IV. 8. 3.

<p>Þórer, priest, Pol. 13. 3.

<p>Þórer Refskegg, a thrall of Ingimundr enn Gamle, III. 5. 2.

<p>Þórer Símunarson, Hv. 3. 13.

<p>Þórer Skegg-Broddason, IV. 3. 1: V. 9. 1: Mant. 4. 2.

<p>Þórer Skeggjason, III. 20. 2.

<p><hi>Þórer Snepill Ketilsson</hi>, III. 16. 1; 16. 5: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Þórer Steingrímsson Trolla, II. 29. 3.

<p>Þórer Steinmóðsson, Hv. 4. 12.

<p>Þórer enn Svarte, III. 12. 6.

<p>Þórer konungr Svína-B&aolig;ðvarsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16 (Kaunsson).

<p>Þórer iarl Þegjande R&aolig;gnvallzson Mæraiarls, III. 5. 2: IV. 14. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórer Þiðrande, IV. 4. 1: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19; 27&ndash;8.

<p>Þórer Þórbergsson (al. Hróarsson), II. 6. 4.

<p>Þórer Þórbrannzson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Þórer Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

<p>Þórer (al. Þórkell) Þórfinnzson, IV. 3. 3 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Þórer Þórgilsson, of Akrar, II. 4. 15.

<p>Þórer Þórkelsson Þrastarsonar, II. 30. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þórer Þrándarson, II. 4. 15.

<p>Þórer Þurs, see Þórðr Þurs.

<p><hi>Þórer Þursa-sprenger</hi>, III. 14. 17.

<p>Þórey Einarsdótter, III. 19. 4.

<p>Þórey Eyjolfsdótter ens Halta, III. 7. 1: IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 10;  15.

<p>Þórey Gestzdótter Oddleifssonar, II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórfiðr Geirleifsson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórfiðr Goðlaugsson, II. 5. 8: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þórfiðr Hlennesson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórfiðr Hróarsson Tungo-goða, IV. 18. 1.

<p>Þórfiðr á Skeggja-st&aolig;ðom, IV. 3. 3.

<p>Þórfiðr <corr sic="þórbrannzson">Þórbrannzson</corr>, II. 11. 6.

<p>Þórfinna Vermundardótter, II. 7. 8; 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Þórfinnr Carls-emne Þórðarson Hesth&aolig;fða, II. 15. 4: III. 11. 2.

<p>Þórfinnr Finngeirsson, II. 11. 3&ndash;4: Th. 7. 1: 9. 3.

<p>Þórfinnr Hausa-kliúfr Torf-Einarsson, Earl of the Orkneys, II. 14. 2; 19. 2.

<p>Þórfinnr Sel-Þóresson, I. 10. 3: II. 5. 4; 5. 7; 11. 3.

<pb id=pb738 n=738><p>Þórfinnr Þórbiarnarson Blesa, II. 3. 8.

<p>Þórfinnr Þórgeirsson, abbot, II. 20. 9; 23. 2.

<p>Þórfinnr enn Strange, II. 4. 3; 4. 11.

<p>Þórgautr  Myra-Cniúcsson, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

<p>Þórgautr of Þórgautzstaðir, II. 2. 3.

<p>Þórgeirr, f. of Ámunde, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þórgeirr Ásbrannzson, III. 3. 1.

<p>Þórgeirr or Ásgarðz-hólom, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þórgeirr Ásgeirsson, V. 14. 7.

<p>Þórgeirr Ásgrímsson í Odda, V. 7. 5; 8. 3; 8. 7; 9. 2 (?).

<p>Þórgeirr Blundr Geirsson, I. 9. 6.

<p>Þórgeirr Caðalsson, II. 15. 13.

<p>Þórgeirr Cengr Geirr&oelig;ðarson, II. 10. 4; 11. 5: Th. 9. 3.

<p>Þórgeirr Claufe, III. 22. 1.

<p>Þórgeirr Eilífsson, V. 9. 6: Gen. B. 7.

<p>Þórgeirr Eiríksson, III. 8. 1.

<p>Þórgeirr Finnzson, I. 7. 8.

<p>Þórgeirr Flosco-bak Onundarson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Þórgeirr Galtason frá Ásgeirsá, III. 7. 4; 20. 3: Gen. B. 11.

<p>Þórgeirr Goðe Þórkelsson at Liósavatne, L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, II. 15. 9: III. 16. 1; 17. 2; 18. 1: V. 7. 9: Gen. A. 31   (here and elsewhere in Gen. called Tiorvason); 34: Lib. 5. 5; 7. 6; 8. 3; p. 328. 1: Cr. 8. 6&ndash;9.

<p>Þórgeirr Gollner Ófeigsson (al. <corr sic="þórolfsson">Þórolfsson</corr>), I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4&ndash;6: Gen. A. 8.

<p>Þórgeirr Gunnsteinsson Berserkjabana, V. 9. 7.

<p>Þórgeirr Hallason, III. 15. 8: Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Þórgeirr Hávarsson<corr>,</corr> I. 7. 3: II. 15. 11: Gen. B. 12.

<p>Þórgeirr H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 7. 1; 11. 2.

<p>Þórgeirr H&oelig;ggven-kinne Hafnar-Ormsson, I. 7. 11: II. 15. 3: III. 21. 3.

<p><hi>Þórgeirr enn H&aolig;rðske Bárðarson Bl&aolig;ndohorns</hi>, I. 7. 4&ndash;5: V. 3. 3.

<p>Þórgeirr enn Hvinverske, III. 15. 4.

<p>Þórgeirr Iarðlangr, II. 4. 7.

<p>Þórgeirr Lambe of Lambastaðer, II. 4. 12; 20. 5.

<p>Þórgeirr Langh&aolig;fðe Þórfinnzson, II. 20. 9; 21. 1.

<p><hi>Þórgeirr Meldun of Tungofell</hi>, I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3.

<p>Þórgeirr enn Óðe Liótolfsson Goða, III. 12. 4.

<p>Þórgeirr Ofláte Arnórsson, III. 12. 2.

<p>Þórgeirr Rauðr Einarsson Stafhyltings, II. 26. 4.

<pb id=pb739 n=739><p>Þórgeirr Skolm, III. 15. 16.

<p>Þórgeirr Skorar-Geirr Holta-þóresson, V. 3. 3: Gen. A. 8; 20.

<p>Þórgeirr Starkaðarson, Gen. A. 4.

<p>Þórgeirr Suða, II. 19. 5.

<p>Þórgeirr Vestarsson, IV. 5. 1.

<p>Þórgeirr af Víðe-mýre, II. 4. 5.

<p>Þórgeirr Vífilsson, II. 6. 5; 15. 4.

<p>Þórgeirr Vorsa-Ulfsson, IV. 14. 8.

<p>Þórgeirr, f. of Yngvildr, III. 8. 1.

<p>Þórgeirr Þórðarson Bialca, III. 15. 10; 20. 2.

<p>Þórgeirr Þórðarson Freysgoða, Gen. A. 25.

<p><hi>Þórgeirr i Þórgeirsfirðe</hi>, III. 16. 4.

<p>Þórgeirr Þórhaddzson or Hitar-dale, II. 4. 14; 12. 2.

<p>Þórgeirr Þórvallzson, IV. 3. 4.

<p>Þórgerðr Álfsdótter, II. 15. 11; 19. 3: Gen. B. 12.

<p>Þórgerðr B&aolig;ðolfsdótter, III. 15. 3; 20. 1.

<p>Þórgerðr Bolladótter, II. 15. 8.

<p>Þórgerðr Brannzdótter, II. 13. 1.

<p>Þórgerðr, d. of Cecilia, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þórgerðr Egilsdótter Scalla-Grímssonar, II. 15. 9.

<p>Þórgerðr Egilsdótter Síðo-Hallzsonar, IV. 14. 4: V. 9. 10: Gen. B. 10; 15: Lib. 305. 13: Cr. 10. 7: Io. 1. 1; 2. 2.

<p>Þórgerðr Einarsdótter Skálaglams, II. 9. 3.

<p>Þórgerðr Eylaugsdóttir, I. 4. 1   (= <corr sic="Þorgerðr">Þórgerðr</corr> Háleygsdótter?).

<p>Þórgerðr Eyvindardóttir, I. 5. 1.

<p>Þórgerðr Gísladótter, II. 15. 7.

<p>Þórgerðr Glúmsdótter, II. 17. 4: III. 21. 3.

<p>Þórgerðr Háleygsdótter, Gen. A. 32.

<p>Þórgerðr, m. of Hallr the Abbot, III. 19. 5.

<p>Þórgerðr Helgadótter Hestz, III. 19. 5.

<p>Þórgerðr, m. of Hialte Skeggjason, Gen. B. 7.

<p>Þórgerðr H&aolig;scullzdótter, II. 15. 8&ndash;9.

<p>Þórgerðr Ketilbiarnardótter, V. 14. 3; 14. 7.

<p>Þórgerðr Másdótter, Gen. A. 15.

<p>Þórgerðr Nafar-Helgadótter, III. 12. 2.

<p>Þórgerðr Oddzdótter Kaldmunnz, V. 3. 7.

<p>Þórgerðr Ófeigsdótter, V. 3. 4.

<p>Þórgerðr Rafnsdótter, p. 639. 4.

<p><hi>Þórgerðr at Sandfelle</hi>, IV. 15. 1&ndash;4.

<p>Þórgerðr  Síðo-Hallzdótter, IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 15.

<p>Þórgerðr Sigfússdótter Ásgrímssonar, III. 15. 5.

<p>Þórgerðr Sigfússdótter Ellida-Grímssonar, I. 6. 8: Gen. A. 13.

<pb id=pb740 n=740><p>Þórgerðr Sigmundardótter, V. 5. 2; 7. 2.

<p>Þórgerðr Skíðadótter, Gen. A. 32.

<p>Þórgerðr Valþiófsdótter, II. 7. 1.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórbiarnardótter Ormsson, p. 641. 31.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórbiarnardótter Vífilsson, II. 4. 13; 7. 5.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórbrannzdótter, II. 8. 1.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórðardótter Erro, II. 3. 8.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórðardótter frá Múla, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórfinnzdótter Heiðar-eckja, II. 3. 8.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórgeirsdótter Ásbrannzsonar, III. 3. 1.

<p>Þórgerðr (al. Þuríðr) Þórgeirsdótter Gollnes, V. 3. 6.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórgeirsdótter H&oelig;ggven-kinna, II. 15. 3.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórgilsdótter, Th. 8. 3.

<p>Þórgerðr Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 14. 1; 14. 3; 15. 9&ndash;10: Gen. A. 35.

<p>Þórgestr, s. of Arnbiorg, II. 3. 5.

<p>Þórgestr Bersason, I. 7. 2.

<p>Þórgestr Steinsson Miok-siglanda, II. 11. 8; 12. 2; 12. 4: Th. 9. 3 (enn Gamle).

<p>Þórgestr, s. of Þórdís, II. 15. 2.

<p>Þórgils Arason of Reykjahólar, II. 2. 1; 6. 5; 19. 3: Gen. B. 12; 14&ndash;15.

<p>Þórgils Arason ens Fróða, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Þórgils Arngeirsson, III. 22. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þórgils Ásbiarnarson, IV. 15. 3.

<p>Þórgils Auga Grímsson, I. 10. 6.

<p><hi>Þórgils Cnappe</hi>, II. 4. 15.

<p>Þórgils Collzson, II. 19. 5; 20. 2.

<p>Þórgils Eilífsson, Cr. 3. 5: Thorv. 7.

<p>Þórgils Errobeins-stiúpr Þórðarson, V. 11. 2; 12. 2.

<p>Þórgils Geirsteinsson, II. 20. 9.

<p>Þórgils Gellisson, f. of Are Fróðe, II. 12. 6: V. 17. 1: Gen. B. 14: Th. 7. 4: Lib. 306. 18.

<p>Þórgils Giallande, III. 4. 1; 5. 15.

<p>Þórgils Gormsson, III. 9. 1.

<p>Þórgils Grímsson, II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

<p>Þórgils, husband of Gunnhildr Símonardótter, II. 6. 4.

<p>Þórgils Hafliðason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórgils H&aolig;lloson (ok Snorra Alfssonar), II. 15. 11; 21. 1.

<p>Þórgils Húnbogason, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórgils Oddason, Gen. B. 9; 11: Mant. 1. 3; 1. 6: Cr. 10. 10: Hv. 3. 13: pp. 598&ndash;9; 641. 31.

<p>Þórgils Reyðar-síða, Gen. A. 36.

<p>Þórgils Vámúle Grenjaðarson, III. 19. 5: Cr. 1. 3.

<pb id=pb741 n=741><p>Þórgils Þórbeinesson, Th. 8. 3.

<p>Þórgils Þórbiarnarson Laxakarls, V. 13 3.

<p>Þórgils Þórbiarnarson Loka, II. 20. 2.

<p>Þórgils, husband of Þórey Gestzdótter Oddleifssonar, II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórgils Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

<p>Þórgils Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

<p>Þórgils Þórsteinsson ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1; 3. 3: Gen. A. 28: Mant. 5. 6.

<p>Þórgils Þórsteinsson Lunans, V. 9. 3; 9. 6.

<p>Þórgils Þórvarðzson Orra-skald, I. 8. 3.

<p>Þórgnýr L&aolig;gmaðr af Svia-rike, III. 16. 1.

<p>Þórgríma Skeiðar-kinn H&aolig;fða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

<p><hi>Þórgrímr Bíldr Ulfsson</hi>, V. 16. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórgrímr Bræker, II. 3. 4.

<p>Þórgrímr Campe Ozorarson, V. 10. 5; 12. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórgrímr Cárnsár-goðe Hallormsson, II. 5. 10.

<p>Þórgrímr Ceallacsson ens Gamla, I. 7. 5: II. 9. 7; 10. 4; 15. 9 b: V. 17. 4: Gen. B. 2; 10: Th. 7. 3; 9. 3; 10. 3.

<p>Þórgrímr Colsson, II. 8. 2.

<p>Þórgrímr Cugge Hialmolfsson, III. 8. 4.

<p>Þórgrímr Digr-Ketilsson, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Þórgrímr Erro-beinn Þórmóðarson, V. 12. 2; 12. 4.

<p>Þórgrímr Eyjolfsson, II. 20. 8.

<p>Þórgrímr Gagarr Liótzson, II. 24. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórgrímr Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

<p>Þorgrímr Grímolfsson, V. 16. 6.

<p>Þórgrímr Gunnolfsson, III. 12. 8.

<p>Þórgrímr Gunnsteinsson ok Hlífar, III. 14. 20&ndash;21.

<p>Þórgrímr Harðrefsson (al. Þórmóðr, f. of Ásdís), II. 23. 2&ndash;3; 24. 1.

<p>Þórgrímr enn Háve, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Þórgrímr H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

<p>Þórgrímr Hæro-kollr Onundarson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 4 (Auðunnarson); 5.

<p>Þórgrímr enn Mikle Þórgeirsson, V. 3. 3: Gen. A. 8 (Holta-Þóresson); 20 (id.).

<p>Þórgrímr Oddzson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Þórgrímr Petarsson, III. 3. 1.

<p>Þórgrímr, f. of Sigurðr, V. 16. 7.

<p>Þórgrímr Skraute Þórkelsson, Gen. A. 22.

<p>Þórgrímr Sviðe, II. 21. 1: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þórgrímr Vermundarson ens Mióva, II. 11. 7.

<p>Þórgrímr Þaungull Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1&ndash;2.

<pb id=pb742 n=742><p>Þórgrímr Þórbiarnarson Skaga, III. 18. 3; 19. 4.

<p>Þórgrímr Þóresson í M&aolig;ðrofelle, III. 15. 6.

<p>Þórgrímr Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

<p>Þórgrímr Þórgeirsson Goða (half-brother of prec), III. 18. 1.

<p>Þórgrímr, f. of Þórkatla, II. 13. 1.

<p>Þórgrímr Þórsteinsson ens Grá, IV. 11. 8.

<p>Þórgrímr Þórsteinsson Þorskabíts, II. 10. 5; 15. 14; 22. 8: Gen. A. 36: Th. 11. 3: p. 319. 6.

<p>Þórgrímr or Þyckva-skóge, II. 15. 10.

<p>Þórhaddr, f. of Brandr, II. 23. 2(= Þóroddr Þórðarson Þvara).

<p><hi>Þórhaddr enn Gamle</hi>, IV. 11. 1.

<p>Þórhaddr Skál Haf-Liótzson, IV. 5. 4.

<p><hi>Þórhaddr Steinsson Mioksiglanda of Hitárdalr</hi>, II. 4. 3; 4. 14; 11 8; 30. 1.

<p>Þórhaddr Þórgestzson, II. 11. 8.

<p>Þórhalla Ásgrímsdótter, Gen. A. 13.

<p>Þórhalla Skaptadótter, Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Þórhalle Colgrímsson, I. 7. 7.

<p>Þórhallr, f. of Ásgrímr, Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Þórhallr Ásgrímsson, Gen. A. 13.

<p>Þórhallr Ásgrímsson (another), Gen. A. 13.

<p>Þórhallr Cetilsson Gufo, II. 17. 6; 20. 6   (= Þóroddr Ýrarson, Gen. B. 8 ?).

<p>Þórhallr Eiðarson. p. 641. 38.

<p>Þórhallr Goðe Oddason, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Þórhallr (? af Hitárnese), Ch. 631.

<p>Þórhallr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Þórhallr Knappr, pp. 416&ndash;17.

<p>Þórhallr Spámaðr, pp. 417&ndash;19.

<p>Þórhallr Þórláksson, V. 9. 3: Þorl. 2. 1.

<p>Þórhallr Þórsteinsson Tialdst&oeacute;ðings, V. 8. 6.

<p>Þórhildr, p. 417.

<p>Þórhildr Biartmársdótter, II. 22. 3; 22. 7.

<p>Þórhildr Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 14. 19.

<p>Þórhildr Riúpa Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2: Lib. 305. 17.

<p>Þórhildr Skáld-kona, Gen. A. 6.

<p>Þórhildr Solvadótter, I. 7. 5.

<p>Þórhildr Þórkelsdótter, Th. 10. 3.

<p>Þórhildr Þórsteinsdótter Haugabriótz, V. 3. 2.

<p>Þórhildr Þórsteinsdótter Ingolfssonar, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórhildr Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 14. 1; 15. 10: III. 1. 1: Gen. B. 12 (Hildr).

<pb id=pb743 n=743><p>Þórhildr Þórvarðzdótter, V. 16. 7.

<p>Þórhrolfr Fasthalde, see <hi>Þórólfr Fasthalde</hi>.

<p><corr sic="Þóriðr">Þóríðr</corr> Arnbiarnardótter, II. 15. 9.

<p>Þóríðr Arngeirsdótter, III. 22. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þóríðr Arnórsdótter, III. 15. 10.

<p>Þóríðr Ásbrannzdótter, II. 7. 2.

<p>Þóríðr Ásgeirsdótter Æðe-kollz, II. 15. 14; 29. 1: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Þóríðr Auðunnardótter Stota, II. 8. 1; 8. 5.

<p>Þóríðr Barkardótter Digra, II. 7. 5; 22. 8.

<p>Þóríðr Dylla Gunnlaugsdótter, I. 6. 4: II. 2. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Eilífsdótter, V. 7. 5; 8. 7.

<p>Þóríðr Eyrlygsdótter, p. 641. 10.

<p>Þóríðr Eyvindardótter Austmannz, w. of Þórsteinn Rauðr, II. 14. 1; 14. 4.

<p>Þóríðr Gilsdótter, Hv. 4. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Gunnarsdótter Hámundarsonar, V. 8. 6.

<p>Þóríðr, m. of Gunnhildr, I. 10. 4.

<p>Þóríðr (al. Þóra) Gunnsteinsdótter, II. 26. 5.

<p>Þóríðr Gyðja Solmundardótter, III. 5. 13.

<p>Þóríðr Hallzdótter Mió-d&oelig;lings, III. 12. 3.

<p>Þóríðr Hallzdótter, p. 641. 34.

<p>Þóríðr Harallzdótter Gollskeggs, III. 6. 1: V. 11. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Helgadótter Biartmárssonar, II. 22. 3.

<p>Þóríðr H&aolig;fða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

<p>Þóríðr Hofgyðja Véþormsdótter, IV. 15. 3.

<p>Þóríðr H&aolig;scullzdótter, II. 15. 8&ndash;9.

<p>Þóríðr Hrafnsdótter, II. 23. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Ketilbiarnardótter, I. 4. 4: V. 12. 2; 14. 3.

<p>Þóríðr (al. Þórdís) Óleifsdótter Feilans, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14.

<p>Þóríðr Óleifsdótter Pá, II. 15. 9: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Þóríðr Refsdótter, III. 11. 2: p. 414.

<p><hi>Þóríðr Rúmgylta</hi>, II. 22. 5; 24. 8.

<p>Þóríðr Sigfússdótter or Hlíð, V. 8. 6.

<p>Þóríðr Spaka Snorradótter, II. 8. 1: Gen. B. 13: Lib. 1. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Spákona of Gr&aolig;f, II. 3. 6.

<p>Þóríðr Steinolfsdótter ens Lága, II. 18. 2.

<p>Þóríðr Sturludótter, p. 639. 3.

<p><hi>Þóríðr Sunda-fyller</hi>, II. 24. 5.

<p>Þóríðr Tumadótter, Gm. 610&ndash;12.

<p>Þóríðr Tungo-Oddzdótter, I. 9. 1; 10. 3: II. 5. 7.

<pb id=pb744 n=744><p>Þóríðr Tyrfingsdótter, V. 11. 4.

<p>Þóríðr Valþiófsdótter, I. 11. 2: II. 20. 6.

<p>Þóríðr Þórbiarnardótter ens Gaulverska, V. 6. 2.

<p>Þóríðr Þórbiarnardótter Þórvallzsonar, II. 7. 2.

<p>Þóríðr Þórðardótter Skeggja, III. 8. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Þórðardótter Sturlusonar, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 13: Mant. 1. 7.

<p>Þóríðr Þóresdótter Hallaðarsonar iarls, II. 20. 2.

<p><corr sic="Þoríðr">Þóríðr</corr> Þórfinnzdótter, II. 4. 3   ( = Þórdís Þorfinnzdótter, II. 4. 11).

<p>Þóríðr Þórfinnzdótter, wife of Þórbrandr of Alftafiorðr, II. 5. 4.

<p>Þóríðr Þórgeirsdótter, V. 9. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þóríðr Þórgilsdótter Arasonar, II. 8. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Þórkelsdótter or Goðd&aolig;lom, III. 12. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Þórleifsdótter Ásmundarsonar, III. 20. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Þórleifsdótter Avangrssonar, I. 7. 1.

<p>Þóríðr Þórleifsdótter Eyvindarsonar Cnés, II. 22. 5.

<p>Þóríðr Þórsteinsdótter, p. 642. 39.

<p>Þórilldr, see Þórhildr.

<p>Þórkatla B&aolig;ðvarsdótter, III. 21. 1.

<p>Þórkatla Dala-Collzdótter, II. 15. 9: III. 18. 1.

<p>Þórkatla Halldórsdótter Collzsonar, III. 2. 3.

<p>Þórkatla Halldórsdótter Snorrasonar, II. 20. 2: III. 6. 4.

<p>Þórkatla Hergilsdótter, II. 17. 4; 19. 1.

<p>Þórkatla Hringja, V. 8. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórkatla Ketilbiarnardótter, V. 7. 2; 14. 3; 14. 7: Gen. A. 14.

<p>Þórkatla Ófeigsdótter, II. 17. 6.

<p>Þórkatla, d. of Otkatla, V. 13. 3.

<p>Þórkatla Skeggjadótter, II. 7. 2.

<p>Þórkatla Vémundardótter, IV. 19. 3.

<p>Þórkatla Þórgrímsdótter, II. 13. 1.

<p>Þórkatla Þórsteinsdótter Tiald-st&oeacute;ðings, V. 8. 6.

<p>Þórkatla Þórvallzdótter, II. 3. 7.

<p>Þórkell Ásgeirsson Kneifar, I. 5. 1: V. 3. 2: Io. 1. 1.

<p>Þórkell Blund-Cetilsson, II. 2. 5: Lib. 5. 1.

<p><hi>Þórkell Bundin-fóte</hi>, V. 6. 3; 7. 8: Gen. 4.

<p>Þórkell Claca, IV. 10. 2.

<p>Þórkell Colzson, V. 14. 5.

<p><hi>Þórkell Corna-múle</hi>, I. 10. 7.

<p>Þórkell Crafla, Cr. 1. 2.

<pb id=pb745 n=745><p>Þórkell Cugge Þórðarson Gellis, II. 7. 8; 15. 9 b: 15. 14; 29. 1: Gen. B. 2; 4; 5.

<p>Þórkell Dufnallsson, II. 15. 7.

<p>Þórkell Eiríksson or Goðd&aolig;lom, III. 8. 1; 12. 1; Gen. A. 33: Cr. 6. 1.

<p>Þórkell Eiríksson or Keldo-dal, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þórkell Eyjolfsson Grá, II. 15. 14.

<p>Þórkell Eyjolfsson í Haga, III. 14. 11.

<p>Þórkell <corr sic=Eyjolfson>Eyjolfsson</corr>, Þórðarssonar Gellis, II. 15. 8: Gen. B. 14: Lib. 306. 17: Hv. 1. 12.

<p>Þórkell Eysteinsson, p. 642. 39.

<p>Þórkell enn Fagre, Gen. A. 22.

<p>Þórkell Farserkr í Hvalseyjar-firðe, II. 12. 10.

<p>Þórkell Fullspakr Ketilsson, Gen. A. 27.

<p><hi>Þórkell Fullspakr í Niarðvík</hi>, IV. 8. 1: Gen. A. 27.

<p>Þórkell Geirason, the Canon, IV. 15. 5: Þorl. 6. 1; 7. 2; 12. 9.

<p>Þórkell Geirason, the Leech, IV. 15. 5.

<p>Þórkell Geitisson, IV. 2. 2: Gen. A. 19: B. 15.

<p>Þórkell Gellisson, II. 19. 2: Gen. B. 14: Mant. 1. 7: Lib. 1. 1; 1. 4; 6. 3; 306. 17.

<p>Þórkell Gollcar Þóresson, V. 12. 4.

<p>Þórkell Grímsson K&aolig;gors, II. 24. 2.

<p>Þórkell Gunnvallzson, II. 4. 5.

<p>Þórkell Háeyjar-tyrðill (al. Háeyrar-), Gen. A. 24.

<p>Þórkell Hákr Þórgeirsson, III. 18. 1: Gen. A. 34.

<p>Þórkell Hallbiarnarson or Alviðro, V. 10. 6.

<p>Þórkell Hallzson, priest, Pol. 2. 3; 11. 2.

<p><hi>Þórkell Háve at Gr&oeacute;navatne</hi>, III. 9. 2; 21. 2.

<p>Þórkell Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>Þórkell Kappe enn Auðge Þórðarson, II. 23. 2.

<p>Þórkell Langr, see Þórkell Leifr.

<p>Þórkell Leifr enn Háve Þóresson, III. 17. 2; 18. 1: Gen. A. 31 (Þórkell Langr); 34 (id.).

<p>Þórkell Lón-Einarsson, II. 6. 5.

<p>Þórkell Máne Þórsteinsson, I. 3. 10: III. 6. 6: V. 7. 9: Gen. B. 10 : Lib. 3. 1; 4. 2; 5. 4: p. 327. 17: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Þórkell Meinakr, Th. 10. 3.

<p>Þórkell Naumd&oeacute;la-iarl, V. 4. 1.

<p>Þórkell Osvifsson, II. 9. 3.

<p>Þórkell Scumsson, Abbot, III. 20. 2: Pol. 15. 2.

<pb id=pb746 n=746><p>Þórkell Sigmundarson, II. 6. 4.

<p>Þórkell Skota-Collr Br&aolig;ndolfsson, V. 13. 4: Hv. 3. 1.

<p>Þórkell Starkaðarson, Gen. A. 4.

<p>Þórkell Steinolfsson á Mýrom, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

<p>Þórkell Súrsson, II. 22. 8: p. 319. 6.

<p>Þórkell enn Svarte Þóresson Snepils, III. 15. 10; 16. 1; 17. 2; 18. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Þórkell Svartcellsson, I. 6. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Þórkell Ti&aolig;rvason L&aolig;gs&aolig;gomaðr, Lib. 8. 6.

<p>Þórkell Torfason, I. 6. 6; 10. 2.

<p>Þórkell Trandill Þórbiarnarson, V. 13. 3: Io. 13. 5.

<p>Þórkell Trefill Rauða-Biarnarson, II. 4. 5; 20. 1; 26. 4.

<p>Þórkell af Víðemýre, Io. 12. 2.

<p><hi>Þórkell Vingner Atlason</hi>, III. 7. 4.

<p><hi>Þórkell Þialfe</hi> (al. Biálfe), V. 9. 11.

<p>Þórkell Þórðarson Þórkelssonar, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þórkell Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

<p>Þórkell (al. Þórer) Þórfinnzson, IV. 3. 3.

<p>Þórkell Þórgeirsson Rauðs, II. 26. 4.

<p>Þórkell, s. of Þórhildr Þórsteinsdótter, Gen. B. 9.

<p>Þórkell Þrastarson, II. 30. 3.

<p>Þórlákr Ásgeirsson of Eyrr, II. 8. 1; 11. 7: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þórlákr enn Auðge Ormsson of Hitárdalr, II. 4. 14.

<p>Þórlákr Bergþórsson, V. 9. 3.

<p>Þórlákr Guðmundarson Gríss, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þórlákr Há-Snorrason, II. 29. 3.

<p>Þórlákr enn Helge Þórhallzson, bishop, III. 4. 1: IV. 15. 5; 18. 7&ndash;8: V. 3. 2; 9. 3; 10. 4: Hv. 5. 11: Þorl. 1. 1, &amp;c.: Pol. 1. 1; 1. 9; 2. 1; 6. 2, &amp;c.: Od. 1. 1; 2. 2&ndash;3; 3. 3: pp. 569, 598.

<p>Þórlákr Ketilsson, p. 641. 3, 22.

<p>Þórlákr Ketilsson prests, Pol. 6. 3; 10. 4.

<p>Þórlákr, f. Magnus á Melum, Ch. 635.

<p>Þórlákr Rúnolfsson, bishop, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 4: V. 11. 6; 13. 4: Lib. pr. 1; 10. 10&ndash;11: p. 305. 18: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 2. 11; 3. 1, &amp;c; 4. 3; 4. 10: Þorl. 1. 1; 14. 3: Io. 3. 3: 14. 3.

<p>Þórlákr Steinþórsson of Eyrr, II. 8. 5.

<p>Þórlákr Valgerðarson, p. 639. 7.

<p>Þórlákr (al. Þórleikr) Þórarensson, I. 9. 4: V. 13. 4: Lib. 10. 10: Hv. 3. 1.

<p>Þórlákr Þórsteinsson, Gm. 607.

<pb id=pb747 n=747><p>Þórlaug Ásgrímsdótter, V. 8. 1.

<p>Þórlaug Atladótter ens Ramma, III. 6. 6: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Þórlaug Gyðja Hrólfsdótter, I. 11. 4: II. 20. 6.

<p>Þórlaug H&aolig;fða-Þórðardótter, III. 9. 2; 11. 2.

<p>Þórlaug Hrafnsdótter H&oeacute;ngssonar, V. 4. 7; 6. 2.

<p>Þórlaug Kl&oelig;ingsdótter, I. 5. 1.

<p>Þórlaug Sæmundardótter, III. 6. 6.

<p>Þórlaug Þórmóðardótter (= Geirlaug <corr sic="Þormóðardótter">Þórmóðardótter</corr>?), I. 10. 4.

<p>Þórlaug Þórvallzdótter, V. 9. 10: Gen. B. 15: Io. 1. 1; 2. 2.

<p>Þórleif, d. of Ciolv&aolig;r, I. 10. 4.

<p>Þórleif Þórðardótter, II. 22. 6.

<p>Þórleifr Ásmundarson, III. 20. 1.

<p>Þórleifr Avangrsson, I. 7. 1.

<p>Þórleifr Beiskalde Þórláksson, V. 13. 5: Pol. 6. 3; 15. 2: Od. 4. 2: pp. 639. 6; 641. 29.

<p>Þórleifr Brannzson, I. 7. 5.

<p>Þórleifr Br&aolig;ndolfsson, V. 13. 4.

<p>Þórleifr Cimbe Þórbrannzon, II. 11. 6.

<p>Þórleifr or Crossavík, Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Þórleifr Eyvindarson Cnés, II. 22. 5; 24. 8.

<p>Þórleifr Geirolfs-stiúpr Þórgrímsson, III. 19. 4.

<p>Þórleifr Gneiste, V. 7. 2.

<p>Þórleifr Hrómundarfóstre Þórbiarnarson Þynnu, II. 30. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þórleifr Hvala-skúfr Ánsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16 (Arnarson Hyrno).

<p>Þórleifr Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 3.

<p>Þórleifr Krákr Holta-Þóresson, V. 3. 3: Gen. A. 8; 20.

<p>Þórleifr Miðlungr B&aolig;ðvarsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16.

<p>Þórleifr Skáld Ásgeirsson Rauðfeldar, III. 14. 6.

<p>Þórleifr Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þórleifr or Sogne, V. 12. 1.

<p>Þórleifr enn Spake H&aolig;rða-Kárason, IV. 13. 2: Gen. B. 15&ndash;16: Lib. 2. 2.

<p>Þórleifr Steinolfsson, II. 4. 13.

<p>Þórleifr Þióstolfsson, I. 6. 4.

<p>Þórleifr Þórðarson, Od. 4. 1: Ch. 635: p. 640. 49.

<p>Þórleifr Þórvallzson, II. 13. 1.

<p>Þórleikr Bollason, II. 9. 3; 15. 8.

<p>Þórleikr Brannzson, II. 9. 4.

<p>Þórleikr H&aolig;scullzson, II. 15. 8&ndash;9; 20. 7: III. 11. 2: Gen. A. 35.

<p>Þórleikr Ormsson, p. 641. 29, 40.

<p>Þórleikr Þórarensson, see Þórlákr.

<p>Þórleikr Þórleifsson, p. 639. 6.

<pb id=pb748 n=748><p>Þórliót Eysteinsdótter, IV. 16. 4.

<p>Þórliót Hialtadótter, III. 9. 2.

<p>Þórliót Steinr&oelig;ðardótter, III. 14. 18.

<p>Þórliótr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

<p>&ast;Þórmódr, an Irish thrall, II. 20. 3; 20. 5.

<p>Þórmóðr, f. of Ásdís (al. Þórgrímr Harðrefsson), II. 23. 2.

<p>Þórmóðr Breiðsson, II. 6. 4.

<p>Þórmóðr Cársson, V. 16. 2.

<p>Þórmóðr Colbrúnarskáld Bersason, II. 20. 8; 26. 1.

<p><hi>Þórmóðr enn Gamle Bresason</hi>, of Akranes, I. 6. 4; 7. 2; 7. 10; 11. 1: [II. 2. 1].

<p><hi>Þórmóðr Goðe Oddzson</hi>, II. 5. 6&ndash;7; 8. 1; 9. 4: Th. 7. 3.

<p><hi>Þórmóðr í Grene-vík</hi>, III. 16. 3.

<p>Þórmóðr Hamalsson, I. 3. 10.

<p>Þórmóðr Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 3.

<p>Þórmóðr, a priest, Cr. 8. 3.

<p><hi>Þórmóðr enn Ramme Harallzson á Siglanese</hi>, III. 12. 6&ndash;7.

<p><hi>Þórmóðr Skafte Oleifsson Breiðs</hi>, V. 12. 5; 13. 1&ndash;2: Gen. A. 16: Mant. 5. 5.

<p>Þórmóðr Scalle H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

<p>Þórmóðr Skeiða-goðe Goðmundarson, I. 3. 10.

<p>Þórmóðr Steinr&oelig;ðarson, V. 16. 2.

<p>Þórmóðr Sticko-blígr Steinbiarnarson, IV. 2. 2.

<p>Þórmóðr Þióstarsson, I. 7. 1; 11. 3: II. 17. 6; 20. 6: IV. 17. 4: V. 7. 2: Gen. B. 8.

<p>Þórmóðr Þórbiarnarson Iarlakappa, V. 13. 5.

<p>Þórmóðr Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6.

<p>Þórmóðr, f. of Þórgrímr Errobeinn, V. 12. 2.

<p>Þórmóðr Þórkellsson, I. 3. 10: III. 6. 6: pp. 327. 18; 328. 3.

<p>Þórmóðr lækner Þórgeirsson, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Þórmóðr Þórláksson, II. 8. 1; 11. 7: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þórný Goðbrannzdótter Kúlo, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Þórný, d. of Gunnv&aolig;r, I. 9. 4.

<p>Þórný Sigmundardótter, III. 9. 2.

<p>Þórný Þórsteinsdótter, see Þórunn.

<p>Þórodda Onundardótter, I. 10. 1.

<p>Þóroddr Biarnarson, III. 14. 12.

<p>Þóroddr Dr&aoacute;po-stúfr Arnórsson, III. 1. 2.

<p>Þóroddr Gamlason, Io. 9. 2.

<p>Þóroddr Goðe Eyvindarson, V. 13. 2; 16. 6: Gen. A. 16: Cr. 1. 2; 8. 5: Hv. 1. 1: Io. 1. 2.

<pb id=pb749 n=749><p>Þóroddr Hialmr, III. 7. 1; 11. 2; 14. 19: Gen. A. 32: p. 642. 4.

<p>Þóroddr Hrísa-Blundr, I. 9. 6.

<p>Þóroddr Skatt-kaupande, II. 22. 8.

<p>Þóroddr, f. of Snerir, Gen. B. 9; 11.

<p>Þóroddr Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þóroddr Tungo-Oddzson, I. 10. 3: II. 15. 14: IV. 17. 4.

<p>Þóroddr Ýrarson, Gen. B. 8   ( = Þórhallr Cetilsson Gufo?).

<p>Þóroddr í Þingnese, II. 26. 2; 26. 4.

<p>Þóroddr Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6.

<p>Þóroddr Þórðarson Þvara, IV. 3. 7   ( = Þórhaddr, f. of Brandr).

<p><hi>Þóroddr á Þóroddz-st&aolig;ðom</hi>, III. 1. 2.

<p><hi>Þórolfr Asksson í Þórolfsfelle</hi>, V. 3. 4&ndash;5.

<p><hi>Þórolfr Bl&aolig;ðro-skalle</hi>, II. 8. 1: Th. 7. 2.

<p><hi>Þórolfr Bræker</hi>, II. 22. 5; 24. 7.

<p>Þórolfr B&oeacute;gefótr Biarnarson, II. 7. 6; 11. 4&ndash;5.

<p><hi>Þórolfr Fasthalde</hi>,  II. 26. 6: III. 1. 2.

<p>Þórolfr Halme Þórðarson, IV. 3. 7.

<p>Þórolfr Halme, f. of Þórðr Þvare, IV. 3. 7.

<p>Þórolfr Herjolfsson Hornabriótz, V. 2. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórolfr Kveld-Ulfsson, I. 8. 1: II. 4. 1: V. 4. 1; 5. 2.

<p>Þórolfr Loftzson ens Gamla, II. 5. 8.

<p><hi>Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg Ornolfsson</hi>, II. 10. 1&ndash;5; 20. 1: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 36 (here also called Þórgilsson Reyðarsíðo; cfr. Introduction to Early Geneal. pp. 237&ndash;8): Th. 2. 3&ndash;5. 1; 6. 1&ndash;2; 7. 4&ndash;5; 9. 1; 9. 3: Lib. 4. 2.

<p>Þórolfr Nafar-Helgason, III. 12. 2.

<p>Þórolfr Osvifsson, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3: Cr. 3. 6.

<p>Þórolfr Refr Eysteinsson Meinfrets, II. 15. 11: III. 1. 1: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Þórolfr Skalla-Grímsson, II. 4. 1; 4. 11.

<p>Þórolfr Skialgr Ogmundarson, Gen. B. 15&ndash;16.

<p>Þórolfr, f. of Skæringr, V. 3. 2.

<p>Þórolfr Smior Þórsteinsson, I. 2. 3; 6. 8: III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 32.

<p><hi>Þórolfr Sp&aolig;rr</hi> (= Þorbi&aolig;rn Sp&aolig;rr?), II. 20. 8; 21. 4.

<p>Þórolfr Váganef Hr&oeacute;reksson (or Þróndarson), V. 3. 1: Gen. A. 1; B. 16.

<p>Þórolfr Véleifsson, III. 21. 3.

<p>Þórolfr Vili-gisl, I. 6. 5.

<p>Þórolfr &OElig;xna-Þóresson, III. 14. 21.

<p>Þórolfr, f. of Þórgeirr Gollner, Gen. A. 8; see Ófeigr i Raums-dal.

<pb id=pb750 n=750><p>Þórolfr Þórgilsson, see Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg.

<p>Þórolfr Þórsteinsson Kolskeggs, II. 7. 8; 11. 5: Th. 8. 3 (Herjolfsson Holkin-raza).

<p>Þórolfr Þróndarson, see Þórolfr Váganef.

<p>Þórormr, br. of Hallormr á Cárnsá, III. 5. 10.

<p>Þórormr Helgason, III. 4. 1.

<p>Þórormr í Karlafirðe, V. 13. 5.

<p>Þórormr Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

<p>Þórormr or Þrumo, V. 8. 2.

<p>Þórríðr, see Þóríðr.

<p>Þorskfirðingar, II. 17. 5.

<p>Þórsnesingar, II. 10. 4: Th. 9. 3; 10. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Ásbiarnarson, II. 21. 1: IV. 16. 1   ( = Þórsteinn Ketilsson, Gen. A. 23?).

<p>Þórsteinn Ásgeirsson, II. 3. 4.

<p>Þórsteinn Áskelsson Goða, III. 19. 4.

<p>Þórsteinn Ásmundarson Hæro-langs, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Þórsteinn Biarnarson í Svínhaga, V. 7. 6.

<p>Þórsteinn Biolansson, IV. 17. 5.

<p>Þórsteinn B&aolig;ðvarsson ens Hvíta, IV. 12. 2: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 19: Lib. 7. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Breiðmage Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 19;  21.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn Clegge í Húsavík</hi>, IV. 9. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Collzson ens Grá, IV. 11. 8.

<p>Þórsteinn Cr&aolig;floson, II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Cuggason, II. 7. 8; 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2; 4: Hv. 1. 12.

<p>Þórsteinn Dranga-karl, IV. 18. 5: V. 7. 2.

<p>Þórsteinn Egilsson Skallagrímssonar, II. 4. 9; 15. 14: Lib. 5. 1: Cr. 1. 2: pp. 639. 8; 641. 15.

<p>Þórsteinn Eiríksson Rauða, II. 15. 4.

<p>Þórsteinn Eyjolfsson, III. 14. 4: Mant. 1. 6; 4. 2: Lib. 306. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Eysteinsson Auðunnarsonar, III. 4. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Eysteinsson frá Keldognúpe, IV. 16. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þórsteinn Fagre Þórfinnzson, IV. 3. 3.

<p>Þórsteinn Flosco-skegg Ófeigsson, V. 3. 4.

<p>Þórsteinn Gnúpa-Bárðarson, III. 17. 2; IV. 15. 5.

<p>Þórsteinn Goðe or Ásbiarnar-vík, III. 19. 4.

<p>Þórsteinn Goðe, f. of Biarne enn Spake, V. 7. 9; 9. 4; 13. 2.

<p>Þórsteinn, goldsmith, Pol. 6. 6; 13. 3.

<p>Þórsteinn Gunnarsson, III. 15. 7.

<p>Þórsteinn Hafr-Biarnarson, V. 16. 12.

<p>Þórsteinn Halldórsson, Gen. B. 10.

<p>Þórsteinn Hallsteinsson, V. 11. 3.

<pb id=pb751 n=751><p>Þórsteinn Hallvarzson, V. 15. 2: Mant. 1. 2: Hv. 3. 13.

<p>Þórsteinn Haugabriótr, V. 3. 2.

<p>Þórsteinn Heiðmenningr Eysteinsson, III. 6. 6.

<p>Þórsteinn H&aolig;fðe, III. 19. 1: V. 17. 2.

<p>Þórsteinn Holmuðr Sumarliðason, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2.

<p>Þórsteinn Holmundr Skaptason, pp. 641. 1; 642. 37.

<p>Þórsteinn Hrungner Molda-Gnúpsson, IV. 17. 3.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn enn Hvíte Olvesson ens Hvíta</hi>, IV. 1. 3; 3. 1: V. 17. 2; 17. 4: Gen. A. 28: Mant. 5. 6.

<p>Þórsteinn Hvíte Steinsson Mioksiglanda, II. 20. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3: 5. 12&ndash;13: V. 17. 4: p. 319. 16.

<p>Þórsteinn Ingolfsson, I. 3. 10: V. 17. 4: Gen. B. 10: Lib. 3. 1; 5. 4: p. 327. 14.

<p>Þórsteinn Jónsson Loptzsonar, Od. 2. 2; 6. 1, &amp;c.

<p>Þórsteinn Kambason, Gm. 612.

<p>Þórsteinn Ketilsson ens Fíflska, Gen. A. 23 (= Þórsteinn Ásbiarnarson?): Cr. 4. 3.

<p>Þórsteinn Ketilsson H&aolig;rzka, III. 19. 4.

<p>Þórsteinn Ketilsson Raums, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Þórsteinn Kolskeggr Herjolfsson, II. 7. 8.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn Leggr Biarnarson Blátannar</hi>, IV. 13. 3.

<p>Þórsteinn Liótolfsson, II. 16. 2.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn Lunan</hi>, V. 9. 6.

<p>Þórsteinn Oddleifsson, II. 21. 1; 21. 4.

<p>Þórsteinn Ondor, II. 11. 1: Th. 7. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn &OElig;xna-broddr Oddgeirsson, V. 11. 5.

<p>Þórsteinn Ranglátr Einarsson, III. 14. 4; 14. 10: Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 3.

<p>Þórsteinn Rauðnefr Hrólfsson, V. 7. 9&ndash;10; 9. 4.

<p>Þórsteinn Rauðr Áleifsson ens Hvíta, King of Scotland, II. 10. 5; 14. 1&ndash;3; 14. 5; 15. 9&ndash;14: III. 1. 1: Gen. A. 35&ndash;6; B. 12: Th. 5. 2; 7. 4&ndash;5: Lib. 4. 2.

<p>Þórsteinn, f. of Rúnolfr á Reykjom, Gen. A. 17.

<p>Þórsteinn Scrofe Grímsson, I. 6. 8: III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Þórsteinn Síðo-Hallzson, IV. 3. 1; 12. 2; 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 10; 15: Hv. 4. 1.

<pb id=pb752 n=752><p>Þórsteinn Sigmundarson, III. 21. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Þórsteinn or Skarðe, deacon, Pol. 10. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Skeggjason, p. 639. 5.

<p>Þórsteinn enn Skialge, IV. 14. 9.

<p>Þórsteinn Skioldolfsson, IV. 3. 6.

<p>Þórsteinn Snorrason Goða, II. 6. 5; 15. 4: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Þórsteinn Smiðr Skeggjason, III. 14. 12.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn Solmundarson</hi>, I. 6. 8: II. 21. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Steinolfsson, II. 18. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Surtr enn Spake Hallsteinsson, II. 10. 5; 15. 12; 20. 1: Th. 7. 5; 11. 2: Lib. 4. 2; 305. 16.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn Svarfaðr Rauðsson</hi>, III. 9. 4; 14. 5.

<p>Þórsteinn Svorfr, p. 320. 1.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn Tiald-st&aeacute;ðingr Ásgrímsson</hi>, V. 7. 7; 8. 2&ndash;7.

<p>Þórsteinn Titlingr Geirleifsson, IV. 18. 1&ndash;2: Gen. A. 4; 10; 25.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn Torfe Arnbiarnarson</hi>, IV. 3. 2; 3. 4&ndash;5; 8. 2.

<p><hi>Þórsteinn Trumbo-bein</hi>, IV. 11. 8.

<p>Þórsteinn Úgæfa Helgason, II. 24. 6.

<p>Þórsteinn Upplendingr, IV. 18. 2.

<p>Þórsteinn Vífl (al. Vífill), IV. 19. 3.

<p>Þórsteinn Víga-Styrsson, II. 7. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Þórsteinn Þiocko-bein, IV. 2. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Þórgeirsson  H&oelig;ggven-kinna, III. 21. 3.

<p>Þórsteinn Þórgilsson, p. 328. 12.

<p>Þórsteinn Þórkelsson, p. 642. 39.

<p>Þórsteinn Þorskabítr Þórolfsson, II. 7. 5; 10. 4&ndash;5; 22. 8: Gen. A. 36: Th. 7. 4&ndash;5; 9. 1; 9. 3; 10. 1; 10. 3; 11. 1&ndash;4.

<p>Þórsteinn Þróndarson, II. 2. 1.

<p>Þórsteinn Þurs, III. 18. 2.

<p>Þórsteinn Þynning Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1.

<p>Þórunn (al. Iðunn) Arnardótter or Arnarnese, III. 14. 10.

<p>Þórunn Ásbiarnardótter Myrkárskalla, Gen. A. 33.

<p>Þórunn Ásgeirsdótter Austmannaskelmes, V. 12. 2.

<p>Þórunn en Auðga Ketilsdótter ens Einhenda, V. 9. 2; 9. 7 (here called his mother).

<p>Þórunn Blá-kinn Nafar-Helgadótter, III. 12. 2.

<p>Þórunn Brún Brynjolfsdótter (al. Þórgilsdótter), IV. 18. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórunn Eyverska, V. 9. 11.

<pb id=pb753 n=753><p>Þórunn Gr&oeacute;ningja-Riúpa, I. 4. 2: V. 10. 3.

<p>Þórunn Gunnarsdótter, II. 15. 14: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Þórunn, d. of Helga Ásgeirsdótter, V. 3. 2.

<p>Þórunn Hyrna Ketilsdótter, I. 4. 5: III. 13. 3; 14. 1; 14. 3: Gen. A. 32: Th. 1. 4.

<p>Þórunn Illogadótter, II. 20. 9.

<p>Þórunn, m. of Iósteinn, I. 7. 11.

<p>Þórunn Iósteinsdótter (al. Hólmsteinsd.), I. 7. 8: V. 7. 6.

<p>Þórunn I&aolig;rundardótter, V. 6. 2.

<p>Þórunn Ketilsdótter Kiolfara, V. 16. 4.

<p>Þórunn Leiðolfsdótter Kappa, IV. 7. 2; 18. 1.

<p>Þórunn Skáldkona Surtzdótter, Gen. B. 5.

<p>Þórunn Skallagrímsdótter, I. 9. 5.

<p>Þórunn Steinolfsdótter, II. 4. 13.

<p>Þórunn Þióðolfsdótter, III. 20. 1.

<p>Þórunn Þórbiarnardótter, I. 8. 3.

<p>Þórunn Þórgeirsdótter, I. 7. 11.

<p>Þórunn Þórgilsd., see Þórunn Brún.

<p>Þórunn Þórkellsdótter Bundinfóta, V. 6. 3.

<p>Þórunn Þóroddzdótter, III. 14. 12.

<p>Þórunn Þórolfsdótter &OElig;xna-Þóressonar, III. 14. 31.

<p>Þórunn (al. Þórný) Þórsteinsdótter, III. 17. 2: V. 7. 9: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p><hi>Þórunn at Þórunnar-hálsom</hi>, V. 8. 3.

<p>Þórunn, of Þórunnar-holt, II. 3. 6.

<p>Þórunn á Þórunnartoftom, II. 16. 2.

<p>Þórunn Þórvallzdótter Holbarka, IV. 5. 4.

<p><hi>Þórvaldr Ánason</hi>, II. 13. 1.

<p>Þórvaldr Ásgeirsson, III. 4. 1: V. 13. 3: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5: p. 595.

<p><hi>Þórvaldr Asvallzson</hi>, II. 12. 1; 28. 3.

<p>Þórvaldr Ceartansson, II. 15. 9 b: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Þórvaldr Crókr, see Þ. Krókr.

<p>Þórvaldr Croppin-skegge, Lib. 3. 2.

<p>Þórvaldr Galmansson, III. 14. 12.

<p>Þórvaldr Gizorarson, III. 14. 19: IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 15: Þorl. 12. 3: Pol. 6. 3; 7. 2; 8. 2; 14. 2; 14. 7: Gm. 611.

<p>Þórvaldr Halldórsson í Garpsdal, II. 18. 4.

<p>Þórvaldr Hialtason, III. 10. 1&ndash;2; 20. 3.

<p>Þórvaldr Holbarke H&aolig;fða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

<p>Þórvaldr Holbarke Ísr&oelig;ðarson, IV. 5. 4.

<p>Þórvaldr Hvíte Þórðarson Víkingssonar, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

<pb id=pb754 n=754><p>Þórvaldr Ísleifsson, III. 6. 4: Lib. 9. 2: Cr. 10. 1: Hv. 1. 2: Io. 3. 3: p. 596.

<p>Þórvaldr Ketilsson, Gen. A. 27.

<p>Þórvaldr Krókr Þóresson, III. 14. 10; 15. 6: p. 312. 11.

<p><sic>Þórvalldr</sic> Oddzson, III. 4. 2.

<p>Þórvaldr Óláfsson Belgs, II. 18. 3.

<p>Þórvaldr Orgoðe Halldórsson, II. 29. 3: Gen. B. 11 (Steingrímsson).

<p>Þórvaldr Ormsson Galmanssonar (or Galmansson), III. 14. 12.

<p>Þórvaldr, priest, Pol. 6. 2.

<p>Þórvaldr Refsson, Cr. 2. 3.

<p>Þórvaldr Síðo-Hallzson, see Þórvarðr.

<p>Þórvaldr Skeggjason, V. 9. 10&ndash;11: Gen. B. 10: Cr. 8. 2: Io. 1. 1.

<p>Þórvaldr Snorrason or Vatzfirðe, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Þórvaldr Steingrímsson, see Þórvaldr Orgoðe.

<p>Þórvaldr Teitzson, II. 3. 7.

<p>Þórvaldr Tinnzson, II. 7. 2.

<p>Þórvaldr Tinteinn Eysteinsson, III. 6. 6.

<p>Þórvaldr Tungo-Oddzson, I. 10. 3: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Þórvaldr enn Veile, Cr. 4. 4.

<p>Þórvaldr enn Víðf&aolig;rle Coðránsson, III. 6. 6: Cr. 1. 1&ndash;2; 1. 7; 8. 7; 9. 1: Thorv. 1, &amp;c.

<p>Þórvaldr Þiðrandason, Gen. A. 19; B. 15.

<p>Þórvaldr, f. of Þórbi&aolig;rn, II. 7. 3.

<p>Þórvaldr Þórkelsson, Pol. 15. 2.

<p>Þórvaldr Þórsteinsson Torfa, IV. 3. 4.

<p>Þórvaldr í Þórvallzdale, III. 14. 9; 14. 13.

<p>Þórvaldr Þórðarson, see Þórvaldr Hvíte.

<p>Þórvaldr Þórgrímsson Brækiss, II. 3. 4.

<p>Þórvaldr Þórmóðsson Goða, II. 8. 1.

<p>Þórvara Ozorardótter, Cr. 1. 5.

<p>Þórvarðr Ásgeirsson, II. 3. 5.

<p>Þórvarðr Knappe, Io. 4. 1.

<p>Þórvarðr Kr&aoacute;ko-nef, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Þórvarðr Ornolfsson í Crist-nese, III. 14. 15; 14. 18.

<p>Þórvarðr (al. Þórvaldr) Síðo-Hallzson, IV. 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 10; 15.

<p>Þórvarðr Spak-B&aolig;ðvarsson, Cr. 1. 2; 1. 3; 2. 3; 8. 7: Thorv. 7: p. 414.

<p>Þórvarðr Súgandason, V. 16. 7.

<p>Þórvarðr frá Urðom, III. 12. 8.

<p>Þórvarðr Þórbiarnarson ens Svarta, I. 8. 3.

<p>Þórvarðr Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1: Gm. 607&ndash;9.

<p>Þórvarðr of Þórvarðarstaðer, II. 2. 2.

<p>Þórvé Þórmóðardótter Skafta, V. 13. 2.

<pb id=pb755 n=755><p>Þórviðr Freyviðarson, II. 4. 5.

<p><hi>Þórviðr í Skagafirðe</hi>, III. 7. 6.

<p>Þórviðr Ulfarsson, V. 10. 5; 12. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Þórv&aolig;r Ormsdótter, Gen. B. 14.

<p>Þórv&aolig;r Þórbiarnardótter, I. 7. 8.

<p>Þórv&aolig;r Þórmóðardótter Skafta, V. 13. 2: Gen. A. 16.

<p>Þráinn Sigfússon, Gen. A. 6: Nj. 367. 8.

<p>Þráinn Svarte-þurs, III. 14. 5.

<p><hi>Þrase í Skógom Þórolfsson Hornabriótz</hi>, IV. 9. 4: V. 2. 2.

<p>Þraslaug Egilsdótter, Gen. A. 10.

<p>Þraslaug Eyvindardótter, IV. 19. 4.

<p>Þraslaug Onundardótter, IV. 15. 6; 18. 3.

<p>Þraslaug Þórsteinsdótter Titlings, IV. 18. 1: Gen. A. 10; 25.

<p>Þróndr enn Gamle Harallzson Hilditannar, Gen. A. 1.

<p>Þróndr í G&aolig;to, I. 2. 3.

<p><hi>Þróndr Mióbeinn</hi>, II. 17. 4&ndash;5; 18. 7: III. 15. 10.

<p>Þróndr Miok-siglande Biarnarson, III. 13. 2&ndash;3; 15. 1; 15. 4: V. 12. 5.

<p>Þróndr Narfason, III. 12. 7.

<p>Þróndr Nefja, II. 2. 1.

<p>Þróndr Þóresson, II. 4. 14.

<p>Þr&aolig;str berserkr, IV. 18. 2.

<pb id=pb756 n=756><p>Þr&aolig;str Egilsson, IV. 2. 2.

<p><hi>Þr&aolig;str Hermundarson Holkins</hi>, II. 30. 3.

<p>Þróttolfr Véfr&oelig;ðarson, III. 6. 3.

<p>Þuríðr, see Þóríðr.



<div3 id=ixAe>
<head>Æ</head>


<p>Ægileif Hrólfsdótter, III. 18. 2.

<p>Ægileif Þórsteinsdótter Cr&aolig;flo-sonar, II. 21. 1.

<p>Æsa Ceallacsdótter or Svíney, II. 12. 2; 16. 1.

<p>Æsa Gestzdótter Oddleifssonar, V. 15. 1.

<p>Æsa Hákonardótter Griótgarðzsonar, V. 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

<p>Æsa Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs, III. 17. 2: V. 7. 9 (Ása).

<p>Æsa en Liósa, II. 17. 1.

<p>Æsa Liótolfsdótter Goða, III. 12. 1.

<p>Æsa Oddleifsdótter, II. 21. 1.

<p>Æsa Ófeigsdótter, V. 4. 5.

<p><hi>Ævarr enn Gamle Þórgeirsson</hi>, IV. 5. 1; 5. 3; 8. 1; 10. 7.

<p><hi>Ævarr Ketilsson Hello-flaga</hi>, III. 6. 1; 8. 1: V. 17. 2.

<p>Ævarr Vémundarson Orðlokars, Gen. A. 1.



<div3 id=ixOe>
<head>Ö</head>


<p>Ö-, &Ocedil;-, Ø-, &OElig;-, &AOlig;-, see O-.



<pb id=pb757 n=757>
<div2 n=II id=ixPlaces lang=is>
<head lang=en-UK><ab type=divNum>II.</ab> NAMES OF PLACES.</head>


<divGen type=IndexToc>


<div3 id=ixnA>
<head>A</head>


<p>Á (= Árb&oeacute;r), on the w. side of Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 3.

<p>Á, in Síða, east of Skaft&aoacute; (S.), IV. 18. 1.

<p>Á (= Þvátt-&aoacute;), Alftafi&aolig;rðr (E.), Cr. 4. 1.

<p>Aðal-vík, N. from Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 6; 27. 1.

<p>Agða-nes, at the entrance to Trondhjem Firth, Norway, I. 7. 7: V. 9. 7.

<p>Agðer (dat. Ogðom), the southern part of Norway, II. 17. 3; 18. 1; 24. 8: III. 13. 2; 14. 10; 20. 1: V. 8. 2; 16. 5: Mant. 5. 6.

<p>Akra-fell, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 2.

<p>Akra-nes, between Hvalfi&aolig;rðr and Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 2, 4, 10; 11. 1, 3: II. 2. 1: Od. 3. 2.

<p>Akrar (dat. Okrom), between Hit&aoacute; and Alft&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 15.

<p>Alfgeirs-veller, W. of Svart&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 7. 5.

<p>Alfs-nes, Kialarnes (S.), I. 4. 4.

<p>Alfs-óss, ? the mouth of Olfus-&aoacute; (S.), V. 16. 5.

<p>Alfta-fi&aolig;rðr, E. of Þórsnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 5. 4; 8. 1; 11. 3&ndash;4, 6; 12. 2: Th. 7. 1; 8. 1&ndash;2: Ch. p. 636.

<p>Alfta-fi&aolig;rðr, Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 24. 8.

<p>Alfta-fi&aolig;rðr enn n&oelig;rðre, S. of Berofi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 11. 7: Cr. 4. 1: p. 418.

<p>Alfta-fi&aolig;rðr enn syðre, S. of prec. (E.), I. 3. 3: IV. 7. 2; 12. 1: Cr. 4. 2.

<p>Alfta-fi&aolig;ðr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Alfta-nes, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 12&ndash;13; 20. 5.

<p>Alfta-nes, S. of Reykjavík (S.), I. 7. 1; 11. 3: V. 16. 12.

<p>Alfta-ver, W. of Kúðafliót (S.), IV. 17.

<p>Alft-&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 11, 13, 15.

<p>Áll (?), Norway, III. 6. 6: Cr. 1. 1.

<p>Almanna-fliót, E. of Síða (S.), IV. 15. 6.

<p>Alm-daler (?), Norway, IV. 3. 1.

<p>Almenningar enir vestre, Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 6.

<p>Álost, S. H&aolig;rðaland, Norway, V. 4. 1.

<p>Alviðra, Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 33. 2; 24. 4.

<p>Alviðra, N. of Bergen, Norway, V. 11. 6.

<pb id=pb758 n=758><p>Ambáttar-&aoacute;, Vatznes, Húnaflóe (N.), III. 3, 1.

<p>Ána-brecka, beside Lang&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 8.

<p>Andakíls-&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 11.

<p>Andar-kelda, under Skarð, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 6.

<p>Ár (dat. Ám), Gautland, Sweden, III. 13. 1.

<p>Armenia, Mant. 6. 1.

<p>Arnallz-staðer, Skriðodalr (E.), IV. 5. 3.

<p>Arnar-b&oeacute;le, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 10.

<p>Arnar-fell, in the centre of Iceland, III. 8. 9.

<p>Arnar-fi&aolig;rðr, S. of Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 21. 1, 2, 5&ndash;6: III. 14. 9.

<p>Arnar-holt, Stafaholltz-tunga, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 7: IV. 8. 2.

<p>Arnar-hváll, near Reykjavík (S.), I. 3. 7.

<p>Arnar-hváll, on E. side of Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 14. 4.

<p>Arnar-nes, on the W. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (W.), III. 14. 11.

<p>Arnar-stakks-heiðr, W. Skaptafells-sýsla (S.), Cr. 8. 2.

<p>Arnar-þúfa, &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 22. 1.

<p>Arnbiargar-l&oeacute;kr, Þverárhlíð, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 5.

<p>Arneiðar-staðer, Fliótzdalr (E.), IV. 4. 2.

<p>Ár-nes, Árnesþing (S.), Hv. 4. 7.

<p>Arnlaugs-fi&aolig;rðr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Áróss (now Aarhus), Denmark, Cr. 3. 1.

<p>Ásar, in Skaftártunga, N. of Kúðafliót (E.), IV. 18. 1.

<p>Ásbjarnar-nes, Víðedalr, Vestrhóp (N.), III. 5. 13: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Ásbiarnar-staðer, Ornolfsdalr, Hvítársíða (W.), II. 2. 4.

<p>Ásbiarnar-vík (?), III. 19. 4.

<p>Ásgarðz-hólar (= Hólar), S&oeacute;lingsdalr (W.), Gen. B. 13.

<p>Ásgautz-staðer, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

<p>Ásgeirs-&aoacute;, Víðedalr (N.), III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4&ndash;5, 11.

<p>Áshildar-mýrr, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 4.

<p>Áskels-h&aolig;fðe, between Steins-l&oeacute;kr and Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 10.

<pb id=pb759 n=759><p>Ásmundar-leiðe, near Oxl, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 10.

<p>Ásolfs-skále (Eastern), under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (E.), I. 7. 4: Ch. p. 632.

<p>Ásolfs-skále (Western), under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), I. 7. 4.

<p>Áss, Hialtadalr (N.), Cr. 1. 3: Thorv. 7: p. 414 (&lsquo;Ridge&rsquo;).

<p>Áss, between Rauðal&oeacute;kr and Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 11: Hv. 1. 2: Io. 1. 1.

<p>Áss enn Syðre, S. of Hvit&aoacute;, NE. of Reykjaholt (S.), I. 10. 7.

<p>Áss (= Óddsás), Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 12.

<p>Atla-haugr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

<p>Atley in Fjaler, Norway, II. 5. 5: V. 11. 2.

<p>Auðar-tofter, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 14. 8.

<p>Auð-brecka, Horgárdalr (N.), III. 14. 14.

<p>Auðkúlo-staðer, Svínadalr (N.), III. 5. 14.

<p>Auðnir, under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 3. 2.

<p>Auðolfs-staðer, Lángadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

<p>Auðolfs-staðer, Tiornes (N.), III. 20. I <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Auðs-staðer, N. Reykjadalr (S.), I. 10. 5.

<p>Auð-staðer, <hi>see</hi> Oddz-staðer.

<p>Auðunar-staðer, Víðedalr (N.), III. 4. 1.

<p>Auga-staðer, between Auðstaðer and Giljar, N. Reykjadalr (S.), I. 10. 6.

<p>Aurriða-ár-óss, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 14. 8.

<p>Aurriða-&aoacute;, beside Akranes, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 7. 2, 9.

<p>Austfirðer, the eastern coast of Iceland, I. 2. 2; 3. 3; 7. 3: IV. 9. 2: V. 1. 1: Lib. 3. 2: Cr. 4. 2: Pol. 7. 1: Od. 1. 1, 3.

<p>Austfirðinga-fiórðungr, the East Quarter of Iceland, IV. 1; 19. 5: V. 17. 2: Lib. 10. 6: Cr. 8. 7; 10. 6: Hv. 2. 10: Io. 1. 1.

<p>Austr-vegr, the Baltic and adjoining countries, III. 2. 2.

<p>Axlar-hage, Bl&aolig;ndohlíð (N.), III. 8. 4.



<div3 id=ixnB>
<head>B</head>


<p>Backa-holt or Backár-holt, West of Olfus&aoacute; (S.). IV. 15. 3.

<p>Baðz-garðr, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 4.

<p>Balka-staðer, Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (N.), II. 30. 1.

<p>Ballar-&aoacute;, on Skarðsstr&aolig;nd, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 11. 4; 17. 6; 20. 6.

<p>Bár, = Bari, Italy, Hv. 2. 20; 5. 3.

<pb id=pb760 n=760><p>Barð, NW. corner of Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 21. 4.

<p>Barð, Fliót, E. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 2; 12. 2: Cr. 2. 3.

<p>Bárðar-dalr, Skialfandafliót (N.), III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 5.

<p>Bárðar-gata, Fliótzhverfe (E.), III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 5.

<p>Barða-str&aolig;nd, N. of Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 6. 8: II. 20. 8; 21. 1: Th. 7. 3: Cr. 5. 5. <hi>See</hi> Str&aolig;nd.

<p>Barðz-nes, N. of Gerpir, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 4.

<p>Barðz-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 17. 6.

<p>Baugs-staðer, Flóe (S.), V. 7. 1.

<p>Becans-staðer, between Berjadals&aoacute; and Aurriða-&aoacute; (S.), I. 7. 9.

<p>Beigaðar-hváll, Svínavatn (N.), III. 5. 11.

<p>Beigalde, between Guf&aoacute; and Lang&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 6.

<p>Belgs-dalr, Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 3.

<p>Belgs-holt, S. of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), Cr. 5. 6.

<p>Belgs-staðer, Belgsdalr (W.), II. 18. 3.

<p>Berg, Norway, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 15.

<p>Berg-hlíðer, at the E. end of Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 21. 1.

<p>Berg-hylr, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 4.

<p>Berg-Þórs-hváll, Landeyjar (S.), V. 3. 5: Gen. A. 8: Nj. p. 367.

<p>Berja-dals-&aoacute;, N. of Garðar, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 9.

<p>Bero-fi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 11. 6.

<p>Bero-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Króksfi&aolig;rðr, Breiðafi&aolig;rdr (W.), II. 18. 6; 21. 6.

<p>Bero-víkr-hraun, W. of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 1; 7. 1, 3.

<p>Bersa-staðer, between Midfi&aolig;rðr and Hrutafi&aolig;rðr (N.), II. 30. 1.

<p>Bersa-staðer, SW. of Lagarfliót, (E.), IV. 3. 6.

<p>Berserks-eyrr, on Kolgrafafi&aolig;rðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

<p>Berytho, = Beyrout, Io. 13. 6.

<p>Bialla-brecka, old name of Þrasa-staðer (S.), V. 2. 2.

<p>Biarga-óss, <hi>see</hi> Braga-óss.

<p>Biark-ey, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 12. 6: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Biarma-land, N. of Russia, II. 17. 2.

<p>Biarnar-dalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 11.

<p>Biarnar-fi&aolig;rðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 1.

<pb id=pb761 n=761><p>Biarnar-fi&aolig;rðr, N. of Steingrímsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 7; 29. 2.

<p>Biarnar-h&aolig;fn, W. of Þórsnes (W.), II. 9. 2, 3: Gen. B. 13: Th. 6; 7.

<p>Biarnar-nes, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 1.

<p>Biarna-staðer, in Litla Tunga (W.), II. 1. 2.

<p>Biarneyja-flóe, round Biarneyjar in Breiða&shy;fi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 4.

<p>Bíldz-fiall, S. of Ulfliótz-vatn (S.), V. 16. 1.

<p>Bíldz-&aoacute;, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 2.

<p>Bi&aolig;rg (? = Nesbi&aolig;rg), Vestrhóp (N.), III. 3. 1.

<p>Biorgvin, = Bergen, Norway, I. 1. 1 <hi>n.</hi>: Hv. 1. 11; 5. 9: Thorl. 8. 2: Pol. 3. 6.

<p>Biskups-tunga, between Brúar&aoacute; and Hvít&aoacute; (S.), V. 14. 3: Gen. A. 14.

<p>Bitra, = Bitrofi&aolig;rðr, Húnaflóe (W.), II. 17. 6; 29. 5.

<p>Blanda, a river flowing into Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 1.

<p>Blá-serkr, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

<p>Blá-skeggs-&aoacute;, near the bend of Hval&shy;fi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 6. 8; 7. 7.

<p>Blá-skógar, W. and N. of Olfusvatn (S.), I. 9. 1: V. 14. 2: Lib. 3. 2.

<p>Blesa-staðer, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 8.

<p>Bl&aolig;ndo-dalr, SE. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 8, 16.

<p>Bl&aolig;ndo-hlíð, E. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 4.

<p>Bl&aolig;ndo-kvísler, the small streams forming the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 8.

<p>Bl&aolig;ndo-óss, the mouth of the Blanda, Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 1: Hv. 4. 3.

<p>Blundz-vatn, near B&oeacute;r, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 9. 5.

<p>B&aolig;ðmóðs-hraun (<hi>or</hi> -horn), Síða (E.), IV. 16. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðmóðs-tunga, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðolfs-kytja, Tiornes (N.), III. 20. 1.

<p>B&aolig;ðvars-dalr, Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), III. 22. 1: IV. 3. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðvars-hólar, E. of Miðfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 1. 2.

<p>B&aolig;ðvars-holt, Lón (E.), IV. 13. 3.

<p>B&aolig;ðvars-tofter, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

<p>Bólstaðar-&aoacute;, Bl&aolig;ndohlið, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

<p>Bólstaðr, Eastern Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 5. 1.

<p>Borð-eyre, W. of Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 30. 3, 4.

<p>Borg, Mýrar (W.), I. 8. 1: II. 4. 1.

<p>Borg, Víðedalr (N.), p. 323.

<p>Borgar-dalr, E. of Alftafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 11. 4: Th. 8.

<pb id=pb762 n=762><p>Borgar-fi&aolig;rðr, S. of Mýrar (W. and S.), I. 8. 1; 9. 4: II. 13. 6; 20. 4: III. 5. 12: Lib. 5. 1: Cr. 1. 4; 5. 1: Hv. 1. 11; 3. 3: Thorl. 12. 2: Od. 3. 1.

<p>Borgar-fi&aolig;rðr, E. of Héraðzflóe, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 8. 2.

<p>Borgar-h&aolig;fn, SW. of Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 11. 8; 14. 3.

<p>Borgar-holt, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 9. 2&ndash;3: Th. 6.

<p>Borgar-holt, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 8.

<p>Borgar-hraun, to the N. of Mýrar (W.), I. 8. 1: II. 5. 3.

<p>Borgar-l&oeacute;kr, near Biarnarh&aolig;fn (W.), II. 9. 2: Thors. 7.

<p>Borgar-sandr, the SW. shore of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 3.

<p>Borgund, an island in Sunnm&oeacute;rr, Norway, V. 2. 1.

<p>Bótar-skarð, near Mosfell, Grímsnes (S.), V. 14. 4.

<p>Botn, Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 1.

<p>Braga-óss (? Biarga-óss), S. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 3. 1.

<p>Brannz-l&oeacute;kr, S. of &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), Cr. 4. 3.

<p>Bratta-hlíð, Eiriksfi&aolig;rðr, II. 12. 8.

<p>Brattz-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

<p>Brautar-holt, Kialarnes (S.), I. 7. 1.

<p>Brá-v&aolig;llr, E. Gautland, Sweden, IV. 18. 7.

<p>Brecka (= Fagra-brecka), Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 30. 4.

<p>Brecka, S. of Onundarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 24. 1.

<p>Brecka (= Syðre Brecka), S. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), p. 612.

<p>Breckor, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 4. 6.

<p>Breckor, Flókadalr (S.), I. 9. 5.

<p>Breiða-bólstaðr, Fellzhverfe (E.), IV. 14. 3.

<p>Breiða-bólstaðr, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 1: Io. 1. 1; 3. 1; 5. 1: Od. 2. 2.

<p>Breiða-bólstaðr, Pappýle (S.), IV. 14. 8.

<p>Breiða-bólstaðr, N. Reykjardalr (S.), I. 6. 6; 10. 1.

<p>Breiða-bólstaðr, Síða, Lib. p. 305. 11.

<p>Breiða-bólstaðr, Skógarstr&aolig;nd, S. of Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 7. 2; 11. 8; 12. 2.

<p>Breiða-bólstaðr, S&aolig;ckolfsdalr (W.), II. 15. 6.

<p>Breiða-bólstaðr, Vestrhóp (N.), Io. 7. 1 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Breiða-fiarðar-daler (W.), Gen. A. 35.

<pb id=pb763 n=763><p>Breiða-fi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 2. 3: II. 5. 2; 10. 1; 12. 4; 14. 6; 17. 3; 20. 4; 21. 6: III. 21. 3: Gen. B. 12: Th. 4; 6; 9; 10: p. 277: Lib. 2. 1; 5. 1; p. 305. 15.

<p>Breiða-mýrr (Eastern), Flóe (S.), V. 10. 1.

<p>Breiða-mýrr (Western), Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

<p>Breiða-mýrr, S. of Einarsstaðer, Reykjadalr (N.), III. 19. 3.

<p>Breið-ár-sandr, NE. of Ingolfsh&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 14. 10.

<p>Breiða-vík, SW. of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 8. 3.

<p>Breiða-vík, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 11. 6.

<p>Breið-dalr, Austfirðer (E.), III. 14. 10: IV. 6. 1; 11. 2, 5&ndash;6: Gen. A. 29: Hr. 1.

<p>Breiðfirðinga-fiórðungr, the Western Quarter of Iceland, Lib. 10. 6.

<p>Breið-&aoacute;, Breiðár-sandr (E.), IV. 14. 10: Gen. B. 15.

<p>Brenna, Reykjardalr (S.), II. 1. 2.

<p>Brenningr, Breiðavík, S. of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 12.

<p>Bretland, = Britain, Prol.: Gen. A. 19.

<p>Brimar, = Bremen, Germany, Mant. 3. 2: Cr. 3. 1: Hv. 1. 3: Io. 1. 2.

<p>Brimils-veller, E. of Fróð&aoacute;, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 5.

<p>Brimnes-skógar, on the SE. side of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 9.

<p>Brians-l&oeacute;kr, Vatzfi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 2. 3.

<p>Brok-ey, off Skógarstr&aolig;nd, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Brúna-haugr, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 3.

<p>Bruna-staðer, in or near Ulfsdaler (N.), III. 12. 4.

<p>Brynjo-dalr, Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 6. 7&ndash;8: II. 21. 1.

<p>Brynjo-dals-&aoacute;, Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 3. 8.

<p>Búðar-dalr, Skarðsstr&aolig;nd, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 3.

<p>Búðar-dals-&aoacute;, Búðardalr (W.), Gen. B. 9.

<p>Búland, W. of Skaft&aoacute;, N. of Ásar (E.), IV. 17. 5: 18. 3.

<p>Búlannz-h&aolig;fðe, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 5, 8.

<p>Búlannz-nes, S. of Berofi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 11. 6.

<p>Bulka-rúm (?), II. 4. 14.

<p>Bulungar-vík, Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 24. 5.

<p>Búr-fell, Grímsnes, II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

<pb id=pb764 n=764><p>Byrgis-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Bægis-&aoacute;, Horgárdalr (N.), III. 14. 19&ndash;20.

<p>B&oeacute;jar-sker, W. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), V. 16. 3.

<p>B&oeacute;r, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 6: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 1. 11: Od. 3; 4.

<p>B&oeacute;r, Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 4. 3; 30. 1&ndash;2.

<p>B&oeacute;r, Lón (E.), IV. 13. 1, 3.



<div3 id=ixnC>
<head>C</head>


<p>Calls-brecka, Calmans-&aoacute;, &amp;c, <hi>see</hi> under K.

<p>Cantaraborg, = Canterbury, England, Cr. 3. 1.



<div3 id=ixnD>
<head>D</head>


<p>Dala-l&aolig;nd, = Breiðafiarðar-daler (W.), II. 14. 8: Thors. 6. 3.

<p>Daler, the dales SW. of Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 21. 6.

<p>Daler, = Breiðafiarðar-daler (W.), II. 5. 4; 15. 7, 11; 19. 3: III. 1. 1; 6. 5: Gen. B. 11; 12: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Daler, to the W. of Óláfsfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 6.

<p>Dalr ( = Stóridalr), E. of Markarfliót (S.), Gen. A. 2.

<p>Dals-fi&aolig;rðr á Fi&aolig;lom, Sunnm&oeacute;rr, Norway, I. 3. 1.

<p>Dals-mynne, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 11 (<hi>M</hi>).

<p>Danm&aolig;rk, = Denmark, I. 1: III. 2. 2: V. 2. 1: Lib. 7. 7; 10. 11: Cr. 3. 3; 8. 8; 9. 2; 10. 3: Hv. 1. 12; 3. 3. 5; 4. 3: Pol. 3. 2; 7. 3: Io. 2. 1; 4. 1; 6. 1; 7. 2.

<p>Deilðar-ey, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 16. 2.

<p>Deilðar-gil, beside Hvít&aoacute; (S.), I. 10. 7.

<p>Deilðar-hialle, near Másstaðer, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 16.

<p>Deilðar-&aoacute;, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 3. 5; 5. 1.

<p>Deilðar-&aoacute;, H&aolig;fðastr&aolig;nd, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 9. 2.

<p>Digra-nes, S. of Borg, in Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 4. 10.

<p>Digra-nes, E. of Sandvík (E.), IV. 1. 3; 2. 3.

<p>Dimunar-vágr, off D&aolig;gorðarnes, Breiðafi[a]orðr (W.), II. 12. 2.

<p>Diúpa-dalr, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 15. 7: Gen. B. 16: Cr. 1. 5.

<p>Diúpa-fi&aolig;rðr, W. from Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 9b; 20. 2: Gen. B. 2.

<p>Diúp-&aoacute;, Bl&aolig;ndohlíð, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 8.

<p>Dnepr, Dnapr, the R. Dnieper, Cr. 9. 1.

<pb id=pb765 n=765><p>Dofrar, Goðbrandsdaler, Norway, IV. 12. 1.

<p>D&aolig;gorðar-nes, Skarðsstr&aolig;nd, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 7. 6; 14. 7.

<p>D&aolig;gorðar-&aoacute;, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 14. 8; 16. 1: Th. 6. 3.

<p>Dránga-land, beside Drángar, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 3.

<p>Drángar, Horgárdalr (N.), III. 14. 15.

<p>Drángar, Hornstrander (W.), II. 12. 1; 26. 4 (?); 28. 3.

<p>Drángar, Skógarstr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 12. 2.

<p>Drángar (= Lóndrángar), Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

<p>Dránga-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 3.

<p>Drángs-hlíð, under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 2. 2.

<p>Drápo-hlíð, S. of Þórsnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 9. 3: Th. 7. 3; 8. 3.

<p>Drífande, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 2; 18. 1.

<p>Drit-sker, W. of Þórsnes (W.), II. 10. 3: Th. 4; 10.

<p>Dropn, for Dnopr (<hi>see</hi> Dnepr), the Dnieper, Thorv. 7.

<p>Drumb-Oddz-staðer, Biskups-tungor (S.), V. 14. 6.

<p>Dufans-dalr, Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 21. 6; 22. 3.

<p>Dufgus-dalr, Miklaholts-hreppr (W.), Gen. B. 13.

<p>Dúfo-nefs-skeið, in the centre of Iceland, III. 8. 9.

<p>Dufþacs-holt, N. of Þver&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 4.

<p>Dufþacs-skor, Vestmanna-eyjar, I. 3. 7.

<p>Dums-haf, the Arctic Ocean, III. 14. 1.

<p>Dur-holma-óss, Mýdalr (E.), Cr. 8. 2.

<p>Dyflinn, Dublin, I. 1; 8. 3: II. 14. 1.

<p>Dyflinnar-skíre, the country round Dublin, II. 14. 1.

<p>Dyn-skógar, Álftaver (E.), IV. 18. 4.

<p>Dýra-fi&aolig;rðr, Vestfirðer (W.). II. 20. 8; 22. 6&ndash;7; 23. 1; 25. 2.

<p>Dyr-hólar, Mýdalr (E.), Gen. A. 24.



<div3 id=ixnE>
<head>E</head>


<p>Egils-staðer, Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 2. 2.

<p>Eið, S. of Þrandheimr, Norway, p. 615.

<p>Eið, Vestmanna-eyjar, I. 3. 7.

<p>Eilífs-dals-&aoacute;, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 5.

<p>Eilífs-fell, W. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr, Thorv. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Einars-fi&aolig;rðr, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Einars-h&aolig;fn, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2, 4.

<p>Einars-sker, Selasund, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 9. 3.

<p>Einars-staðer, S. of Helgastaðer, Reykjadalr (N.), III. 19. 3.

<pb id=pb766 n=766><p>Einhyrnings-m&aolig;rk, E. of Fliótzhlið (S)., V. 5. 1.

<p>Einkunner, N. of Borg, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 7.

<p>Eiriks-ey, Eiriksfi&aolig;rðr, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

<p>Eiriks-ey, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

<p>Eiriks-fi&aolig;rðr, Greenland, II. 12. 3, 8, 10: Lib. 6. 1.

<p>Eiriks-holmar, on Cape Farewell, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

<p>Eiriks-staðer, Haukadalr (W.), II. 11. 1.

<p>Eiriks-staðer, &OElig;xney (W.), II. 12. 2.

<p>Eiriks-vágr, &OElig;xney (W.), II. 12. 2.

<p>Eldgríms-staðer, Grímsdaler (W.), II. 3. 5.

<p>Eldo-eið, S. of Naumdalr, Norway, V. 4. 1.

<p>Eliiða-ár-óss, E. of Reykjavík (S.), V. 14. 1.

<p>Elliða-ey, off D&aolig;gorðarnes (W.), II. 17. 3.

<p>Eng-&aoacute;, (?) near Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 6. 2.

<p>Engi-nes, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 3.

<p>England, I. 1; 6. 5 <hi>n.</hi>; 8. 1: II. 4. 1: III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Lib. 9. 4; 10. 12: Hv. 1. 11&ndash;12; 5. 13: Thorl. 4. 2; 15. 1: Pol. 1. 4.

<p>Enne, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3&ndash;5.

<p>Esjo-berg, Kialarnes (S.), I. 6. 4; 10. 1: II. 2. 1; 20. 6: p. 327. 16.

<p>Eske-fi&aolig;rðr, Reyðarfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 5. 2; 10. 7.

<p>Eske-holt, between Gliúfr&aoacute; and Guf&aoacute; (W.), II. 4. 5.

<p>Espe-hóll (Northern), on Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 15. 6.

<p>Espe-hóll (Southern), on Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 14. 10; 15. 6; 21. 1: Gen. A. 25: Mant. app.

<p>Eyfirðinga-fiórðungr, the Northern Quarter of Iceland, Lib. 10. 6: Cr. 4. 3 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Eyja-dals-&aoacute;, on the W. side of Bárðardalr (N.), III. 17. 1, 4.

<p>Eyja-fiarðar-&aoacute;, running into Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 4; 15. 10; 19. 1.

<p>Eyja-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd, on the E. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 15. 12.

<p>Eyja-fi&aolig;ll, SE. of Markarfliót (S.), I. 7. 4: Mant. 1: Hv. 2. 17.

<p>Eyja-fi&aolig;rðr, a frith and district (N.), II. 22. 2; 24. 6: III. 14. 2: Gen. A. 25; 32: Lib. 2. 1; 5. 3; p. 305. 20: pp. 312. 6; 329. 7: Nj. p. 368: Cr. 2. 4; 4. 3: Hv. 2. 9; 4. 4: Pol. 4. 1.

<p>Eyjar, = Færeyjar, I. 2. 2.

<p>Eyjar, = Landeyjar(S.), Od. 6. 2.

<pb id=pb767 n=767><p>Eyjar, = Western Isles, I. 4. 5.

<p>Eyjar, = Vestmanna-eyjar, I. 3. 7: V. 3. 7: Cr. 8. 2 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Eyjar-&aoacute;, E. of Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 17. 1; 18. 4.

<p>Eyja-sandr, Landeyjar (S.), V. 3. 7: Cr. 8. 2.

<p>Eyja-sund, off D&aolig;gorðarues, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 14. 7.

<p>Eyja-sveit ( = Landeyjar), the district between Markarfliót and Þver&aoacute; (S.), v. 7. 3.

<p>Eyrar, E. of Olfusár-óss (S.), III. 15. 4: V. 7. 2; 12. 4: Io. 7. 7 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Eyrar-backe, E. of Olfusár-óss (S.), II. 5. 8: V. 11. 3.

<p>Eyrar-hváls-odde, Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), p. 319. 3.

<p>Eyrar-land, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 1.

<p>Eyrr ( = Narfeyre), Alptafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 11. 1, 4; 18. 6: Th. 7. 1.

<p>Eyrr, Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 6. 5; 9. 6.

<p>Eyrr ( = Rafnseyre), N. of Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 8; 22. 2.

<p>Eyrr ( = Ondorðeyrr), Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 5;  9. 4:  Gen. B. 13: Th. 7; 8.

<p>Eyrr,  N. of Onundarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 24. 4.

<p>Eystre-bygð, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

<p>Eystre-dalr, E. and S. of Goðdaler (N.), III. 8. 5.

<p>Ey-vík (<hi>or</hi> Vík), Grímsnes (S.), Cr. 4. 4 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Eyvindar-&aoacute;, runs into Lagarfliót, IV. 5. 2, 4.

<p>Eyvindar-fi&aolig;rðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 4.

<p>Eyvindar-hólar, S. of Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 7. 2.



<div3 id=ixnF>
<head>F</head>


<p>Fábeins-&aoacute;, N. of D&aolig;gorðarnes (W.), II. 17. 3, 6.

<p>Fagra-brecka, W. of Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 30. 3.

<p>Fagra-dalr, Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

<p>Fagra-dalr, Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 3. 2.

<p>Fagra-dalr, W. of H&aolig;fðabrecka (E.), IV. 18. 5.

<p>Fagra-dals-ár-óss, Saurb&oeacute;r (W.), II. 18. 5.

<p>Fagra-dals-&aoacute;, Breiðdalr (E.), IV. 11. 6.

<p>Fagra-skógr, (?) between Kald&aoacute; and Hit&aoacute; (W.), II. 5. 5.

<p>Fagra-vík, Langanes (E.), IV. 1. 1.

<p>Fá-skrúðs-fi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 8.

<pb id=pb768 n=768><p>Faxa-óss, the mouth of Faxafi&aolig;rðr, I. 2. 3; 6. 3.

<p>Feldar-holmr, off D&aolig;gorðarnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 9. 3.

<p>Fell, above Breið&aoacute; (E.), IV. 14. 10: Gen. B. 10.

<p>Fell, Kollafi&aolig;rðr, Húnafl&oeacute; (W.), II. 29. 4.

<p>Fell (= Staðarfell), N. of Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 16. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Fellz-hverfe, Lítla Hérað (E.), IV. 14. 3.

<p>Fellz-múle, W. of Lax&aoacute;, Skialfande (N.), III. 17. 2.

<p>Fellz-múle, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 3.

<p>Fellz-skógar, N. of Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 16. 2.

<p>Ferstikla, on the N. side of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 7.

<p>Fiaðr-&aoacute;, falls into Skapt&aoacute;, W. of Kirkjob&oeacute;r (E.), IV. 16. 1.

<p>Fialer ( = Fialafylke), W. of Norway, I. 3. 1: II. 5. 5: V. 10. 3; 11. 2.

<p>Fiall, = the Alps, I. 1.

<p>Fiarðar-horn, at the head of Hraunsfi&aolig;rðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

<p>Fífla-veller, Þelam&aolig;rk, Norway, V. 8. 1.

<p>Finna-fi&aolig;rðr, N. of Miðfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 1. 2.

<p>Finn-m&aolig;rk, N. of Norway and Sweden, II. 17. 5.

<p>Fi&aolig;ll, = Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 7. 2.

<p>Fión, Fyn (Funen), Denmark, Hv. 2. 20.

<p>Firðir (= Firða-fylke), in W. of Norway, II.2. 1: III. 13. 2: Mant. 5.

<p>Fiske-l&oeacute;kr, near the head of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 15. 11;20. 2.

<p>Fisk-&aoacute;, runs into Eastern Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 7. 9.

<p>Fitjar, on Stordö, S. of Bergen, Norway, I. 7. 11: III. 17. 2.

<p>Flánga-staðer, near Kirkjob&oeacute;r, Síða (E.), IV. 7. 2.

<p>Flata-tunga, between Norðr&aoacute; and J&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 6.

<p>Flat-ey, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Flat-ey, off Flateyjardalr (N.), p. 612.

<p>Flat-eyjar-dalr, W. of Skialfande (N.), III. 16. 5.

<p>Fliót (Norðlinga-fliót), runs into upper Hvit&aoacute;, II. 1. 1; 2. 1.

<p>Fliót, Hornstrander (W.), II. 25. 1.

<p>Fliót, = Markarfliót (S.), V. 3. 5; 6. 1; 7. 3.

<p>Fliót, NE, of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 6.

<p>Fliót, = Skialfandafliót (N.), III. 20. 3.

<p>Fliótz-dalr, Hvítársíða (W.), II. 2. 2.

<p>Fliótz-dalr, the valley of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 1; 5. 2; 10. 7: Cr. 4. 2.

<pb id=pb769 n=769><p>Fliótz-hlíð (S.), V. 4. 7 <hi>n.</hi>; 7. 1: Gen. A. 5; 6: Cr. 4. 4: Hv. 4. 10: Thorl. 1. 1: Io. 1. 1.

<p>Fliótz-hverfe, E. of Síða (E.), III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 5.

<p>Fliótz-&aoacute;, = Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 1.

<p>Flóe (S.), I. 7. 12: V. 5. 2 (<hi>S</hi>); 7. 2.

<p>Flóka-dalr, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 6. 5; 9. 3: II. 20. 3.

<p>Flóka-dalr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 5.

<p>Flóka-dals-&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 9. 3.

<p>Flóka-dals-&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 2.

<p>Flóka-vágr, Shetland, I. 2. 3.

<p>Flóka-varðe, on the borders of H&aolig;rðaland and Rogaland, Norway, I. 2. 3.

<p>Flugo-mýrr, S. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 8&ndash;9: p. 603.

<p>Fnióska-dals-&aoacute;, Fnióskadalr (N.), II. 15. 12.

<p>Fola-fótr, between Hestfi&aolig;rðr and Skaotofi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 25. 2.

<p>Fors, on Lang&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 11.

<p>Fors, on Holmkels&aoacute; (W.), II. 7. 3.

<p>Fors, N. of Skaptár-óss (E.), IV. 15. 6.

<p>Fors, between Fisk&aoacute; and Eastern Rang&aoacute;, (S.), V. 7. 9.

<p>Fors-ár-skógar, Gen. B. 15.

<p>Fors-fi&aolig;rðr, Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 5.

<p>Fors-&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 8. 3.

<p>Fors-&aoacute;, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 7&ndash;8.

<p>Fors-&aoacute;, Skagastr&aolig;nd (N.), III. 6. 5.

<p>Fors-&aoacute;, Sólheimasandr (S.), V. 2. 2.

<p>Fors&oeacute;lo-dalr, S. of Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 7.

<p>Fors-v&aolig;llr, W. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (E.), IV. 3. 4.

<p>Frakkland, = France, Lib. 9. 7.

<p>Framnes, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 3.

<p>Friðleifs-dalr, Sléttahlíð (N.), III. 11. 4.

<p>Fróð-ár-óss, the mouth of Fróð&aoacute; (W.), II. 7. 4.

<p>Fróð-&aoacute;, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 4; 22. 8.

<p>Fúlal&oeacute;kr (= I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;), Sólheimasandr (S. and E.), IV. 9. 3; 19. 1.

<p>Fura, (?) Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9.

<p>Fyllar-l&oelig;kr (al. Fúld-), Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2, 4.

<p>Fyrileif, Ránríke, Norway, Hv. 4. 3.

<p>Færeyjar, the Faroe Islands, I. 1; 2. 2: II. 6. 2; 14. 5.



<div3 id=ixnG>
<head>G</head>


<p>Galmans-str&aolig;nd, on the W. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 8.

<p>Galtar-hamarr, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 2.

<p>Garðar, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 3: Od. 3; 4.

<pb id=pb770 n=770><p>Garðar (= Garðaríke), Russia, III. 9. 1.

<p>Garðars-holmr, the oldest name of Iceland, I. 2. 1.

<p>Garps-dalr, Gilsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 4.

<p>Gata, in the Færöes, I. 2. 3.

<p>Gaular, in Fialer, Norway, I. 3. 2: V. 9. 1; 10. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Gaulverja-b&oelig;r, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 1.

<p>Gautland, Sweden, III. 5. 1; 13. 1&ndash;2: Gen. B. 5: Lib. 10. 1: Io. 6. 1; 10. 1.

<p>Gautz-dalr, Laxárdalr (N.), III. 6. 3.

<p>Geira-staðer, W. of Mývatn (N.), III. 21. 3.

<p>Geira-staðer, NW. of Húnavatn (N.), III. 21. 3.

<p>Geira-staðer, Króksfi&aolig;rðr (W.), III. 21. 3.

<p>Geirhilldar-vatn, Shetland, I. 2. 3.

<p>Geir-land, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 3.

<p>Geir-landz-&aoacute;, runs into Skaptár-óss (E.), IV. 15. 6; 16. 1, 3.

<p>Geirmundar-staðer, Sæmundarhlíð (N.), III. 7. 1.

<p>Geirmundar-staðer, Skarðsstr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 17. 6; 20. 4.

<p>Geirmundar-staðer, Steingrímsfi&aolig;rðr (W.). II. 17. 6.

<p>Geirmundar-vágr, Skarðsstr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 17. 3.

<p>Geirolfs-gnúpr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 2.

<p>Geirs-hlíð, Flókadalr (S.), I. 9. 6.

<p>Geirs-holmr, Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 6. 6.

<p>Geirs-&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 9. 4.

<p>Geirv&aolig;r, Álptafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 11. 6.

<p>Geirþiófs-fi&aolig;rðr, Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 5.

<p>Geitland, between Hvít&aoacute; and Geit&aoacute; (S.), I. 8. 2; 11. 1: II. 1. 2: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Gerpir, N. of Reyðarfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 10. 5.

<p>Gers&oelig;me, name of a field, II. 24. 2.

<p>Giá-backe, Þingv&aolig;llr (S.), pp. 358&ndash;9; Cr. 8. 3.

<p>Giá-hamarr, Þingv&aolig;llr (S.), p. 355.

<p>Gil, E. of Reykjaholt (S.), I. 10. 6.

<p>Gil-hage, NW. of Ýrarfell, Svartárdalr (N.), III. 7. 7.

<p>Gilj-&aoacute;, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 3.

<p>Gilj-&aoacute;, near Mælifell (N.), III. 7. 6; 8. 1.

<p>Gilj-&aoacute;, E. of Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 5; 6. 6: Mant. 6: Cr. 1. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Gils-backe, Hvítársíða (W.), III. 2. 3: Cr. 8. 7: Od. 3. 2.

<p>Gils-fi&aolig;rðr, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 4.

<p>Gils-&aoacute;, runs into Gríms&aoacute; S. of Vallanes (E.), IV. 5. 2&ndash;4.

<pb id=pb771 n=771><p>Gísla-vatn, (?) Hellisdalr (W.), II. 3. 8.

<p>Glaum-steinn, Halland, Sweden, Mant. 5.

<p>Gler-&aoacute; (Northern and Southern), Kræklingahlíð (N.), III. 15. 5.

<p>Gliúfr-&aoacute;, runs into Norðr&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 4. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Gliúfr-&aoacute;, runs into I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr, III. 8. 10; 9. 3.

<p>Glóða-feykiss-&aoacute;, runs into I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 8.

<p>Gnúpar, Fliótzhverfe (E.), III. 17. 1; IV. 7. 3 (<hi>M.</hi>); 15. 5; 18. 2.

<p>Gnúpar, Olfus (S.), V. 16. 5.

<p>Gnúpar, N. of  &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), p. 613.

<p>Gnúp-&aoacute;, Hnappadals-sýsla (W.), II. 5. 2.

<p>Gnúpo-dalr, the valley of Gnúp&aoacute; (W.), II. 5. 6.

<p>Gnúpo-fell, E. of Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), II. 24. 6: III. 14. 11; 15. 10; 18. 2; 21. 1.

<p>Gnúpr, between Breiðdalsvik and Berofi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 11. 5.

<p>Gnúpr, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 6.

<p>Gnúp-verja-hreppr, a district between Þiórs&aoacute; and Lax&aoacute; (S.), V. 13. 2.

<p>Goð-daler, S. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 3; 7. 8; 8. 1; 12. 1: IV. 3. 1: V. 11. 4; 17. 2: Gen. A. 28; 33: Cr. 1. 2; 6. 1.

<p>Goðlaugs-h&aolig;fðe, S. of Bitrofi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 29. 5.

<p>Goðlaugs-vík, between Bitrofi&aolig;rðr and Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 29. 5.

<p>Gollbera-staðer, Southern Reykjadalr (S.), I. 9. 1.

<p>G&aolig;ngo-skarð, W. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 2.

<p>G&aolig;ngo-skarðz-&aoacute;, runs into Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 2; 7. 2.

<p>Gota-l&oeacute;kr, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3.

<p>Grana-staðer, on Digranes (W.), II. 4. 10.

<p>Grene-trés-nes, W. of Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 1.

<p>Grene-vík, E. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 16. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Grenjaðar-staðer, Laxárdalr, Skialfande (N.), III. 19. 5.

<p>Grenmarr, E. of Liðandesnes, Norway, V. 8. 2.

<p>Grettes-geil, on Lax&aoacute; (S.), V. 13. 2.

<p>Grímars-staðer, N. of Hvanneyre, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), II. 4. 9.

<p>Grímolfs-fit, -l&oeacute;kr, -staðer, near Borg, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 4. 9.

<p>Grímolfs-v&aolig;tn, Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 25. 2.

<pb id=pb772 n=772><p>Gríms-ár-óss, the mouth of Gríms&aoacute; in Borgarfirth (W.), II. 26. 4: III. 5. 2: V. 12. 2.

<p>Gríms-dalr, Mýrar, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 4. 2.

<p>Gríms-ey, N. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), p. 613.

<p>Gríms-ey, at the mouth of Steingrímsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 5. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Gríms-gil, West of Húsafell on Hvít&aoacute; (S.), I. 10. 6.

<p>Gríms-nes, a district SE. of Olfusvatn (S.), II. 21. 1: V. 14. 3; 15. 1: Gen. A. 15: Cr. 4. 4.

<p>Gríms-&aoacute;, a tributary of Hvít&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr, I. 8. 2; 9. 2, 4: Od. 4. 2.

<p>Gríms-&aoacute;, Flóe (S.), V. II. 2.

<p>Gríms-&aoacute;, E. of Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 18. 6.

<p>Grinda-l&oeacute;kr, III. 6. 3.

<p>Grinda-vík, S. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), IV. 17. 2: V. 16. 8: Ho. 4.

<p>Grindill, Flókadalr, III. 12. 2.

<p>Grindr, near Tungan lítla, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 1. 1.

<p>Griótgarðz-haugr, S. of Agðarnes, Norway, I. 7. 7.

<p>Griót-&aoacute;, in the W. part of Fliótzhlíð, Gen. A. 6.

<p>Griót-&aoacute;, a tributary of Hit&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 13.

<p>Griót-&aoacute;, E. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 9. 2, 4.

<p>Griót-Vallar-múle, Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 1, 3.

<p>Grísar-tunga, between Gliúfr&aoacute; and Norðr&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 4. 2.

<p>Gr&aolig;f, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 6.

<p>Gró-nes, between Diúpafi&aolig;rðr and Gufufi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 2.

<p>Gr&oeacute;na-land, <hi>see</hi> Gr&oeacute;nland.

<p>Gr&oeacute;na-vatn, S. of Mývatn (N.), III. 21. 2.

<p>Gr&oeacute;nland, = Greenland, I. 1: II. 12. 5&ndash;10; 19. 4; 28. 3: V. 16. 11: Lib. prol. 6. 1: Cr. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 3: Pol. 7. 1.

<p>Grund, Eyjafiarðardalr (N.), III. 15. 6.

<p>Grund, under Iorundarfell, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

<p>Grunna-fi&aolig;rðr, Leirárvágar, between Akranes and Melar (S.), II. 2. 1.

<p>Guðdaler, <hi>see</hi> Goðdaler.

<p>Guf(u)-ár-óss, the mouth of Gufu-&aoacute; (W.), II. 4. 1: Cr. 3. 5.

<p>Gufu-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Diúpafi&aolig;rðr, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 2, 6.

<p>Gufu-nes, E. of Seltiarnarnes (S.), II. 20. 3.

<pb id=pb773 n=773><p>Gufu-&aoacute;, or Guf-&aoacute;, runs into Borgarfi&aolig;rðr from the North (W.), I. 8. 1: II. 4. 6; 20. 4.

<p>Gufu-skálar, E. side of Rosmhvalanes (S.), II. 20. 3.

<p>Gufu-skálar, on Guf&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 4.

<p>Gufu-skálar, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 20. 4.

<p>Gunnars-holt, between the two Rangár (S.), V. 7. 2: Gen. A. 5: Od. 6. 1.

<p>Gunnbjarnar-sker, off Greenland, II. 7. 1; 12. 2; 25. 4.

<p>Gunnlaugs-staðer, between Hvít&aoacute; and Þver&aoacute; (W.), II. 3. 1.

<p>Gunnolfs-fell, -vík, N. of Finnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 1. 1.

<p>Gunnolfs-&aoacute;, W. of Óláfsfi&aolig;rðr (N.); III. 12. 8.

<p>Gunn-steinar, Flateyjardalr (N.), III. 16. 5.

<p>Gunnsteins-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

<p>Gygjar-spors-&aoacute;, Hrafnsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 26. 6.

<p>Gyldar-hage, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 6.



<div3 id=ixnH>
<head>H</head>


<p>Haddingja-dalr, Hallingdal, in central Norway, II. 5. 1.

<p>Hafgríms-fi&aolig;rðr, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Hafnar-fi&aolig;ll, on the S. side of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr, I. 8. 1.

<p>Hafnar-fi&aolig;rðr, S. of Alptanes (S.), I. 2. 3.

<p>Háfr, near the mouth of Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 11: Cr. 8. 2: Thorl. 4. 7.

<p>Hafra-fell, NW. of Króksfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 5; 19. 1.

<p>Hafra-nes, S. of Reyðarfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 10. 6.

<p>Hafrs-fi&aolig;rðr, Rogaland, Norway, II. 4. 3; 17. 3; 24. 3; 29. 1: III. 5. 2: V. 12. 5; 16. 4: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Hafrs-&aoacute;, Sólheimasandr (E.), IV. 9. 3; 18. 8; 19. 1.

<p>Hafrs-l&oeacute;kr (al. Háfs-), a tributary of Lang&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 8.

<p>Hafs-botn, in the Arctic Ocean, I. 1.

<p>Hafs-fiarðar-ey, S. of Eyjahreppr, Snæfellznes (W.), p. 328. 12.

<p>Haga-garðr, near Hlíð, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 14. 7.

<p>Haga-nes, Fliót, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Hagbarðz-holmr, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 16. 5.

<p>Hage, Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 26. 4.

<pb id=pb774 n=774><p>Hage, Árskógs-str&aolig;nd, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 11.

<p>Hage, Eystrehreppr (S.), V. 13. 3.

<p>Hage enn forne (= Fornhage), Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 14.

<p>Haka-skarð, near Mosfell, Grímsnes (S.), V. 14. 4.

<p>Hákonar-hella, S. of Bergen, Norway, Mant. 5.

<p>Hákonar-staðer, W. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (E<corr>.</corr>), IV. 3. 5.

<p>Halland, Sweden (formerly under Denmark), Mant. 5.

<p>Hallar-múle, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 1.

<p>Hallbiarnar-v&aolig;rðor, W. of Skialdbreið (S.), II. 26. 2: V. 15. 2.

<p>Hallgeirs-ey, Landeyjar (S.), V. 4. 7 <hi>n.</hi>; 7. 3.

<p>Hallkels-hólar, Grímsnes (S.), V. 15. 2.

<p>Hallkels-staðer, Hvítársíða (W.), I. 7. 10: II. 2. 1.

<p>Hallorms-staðer, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), Od. 1. 3.

<p>Hallsteins-nes, W. of Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 1: Thors. 6.

<p>Háloga-land, a district in the N. of Norway, II. 11. 1; 24. 5; 26. 4: III. 12. 6; 14. 17; 16. 2; 20. 3: IV. 18. 5: V. 5. 1: Gen. A. 32; B. 13: Cr. 6. 3.

<p>Háls, S. of Diúpadalr, Eyjaf&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 15. 7.

<p>Háls enn ytre, Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 6.

<p>Háls, Hnióskadalr (N.), p. 607.

<p>Hálsa-land, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 10. 1.

<p>Hálsar, Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 23. 7.

<p>Hálsar, beside Vatzdalr, Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 12.

<p>Hálsgr&aolig;f, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 9. 3.

<p>Hamar-kaupangr, on Lake Mjors, Heiðm&aolig;rk, Norway, Pol. 3. 3.

<p>Hamarr, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), V. 3. 7.

<p>Hamarr, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 4.

<p>Hamars-&aoacute;, Hamarsfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 12. 3.

<p>Hamrar, on the E. side of Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 6.

<p>Hamrar, (?) near Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 18. 6.

<p>Hámundar-staðer, on the W. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 2, 8.

<p>Hámundar-staðer, perh. between Skapt&aoacute; and Tungofliót (E.), Gen. A. 5.

<p>Hana-tún, former name of Marb&oeacute;le (N.), III. 14. 21.

<p>Hardns-vatn, <hi>see</hi> Hiarðar-vatn.

<p>Háreks-staðer, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 10.

<p>Hásteins-haugr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

<pb id=pb775 n=775><p>Hásteins-sund, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

<p>Haugar, between Gliúfr&aoacute; and Norðr&aoacute; (W.), II. 4. 4.

<p>Hauga-vað, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

<p>Haugr, near Biarkey, Sweden, III. 12. 1, 7.

<p>Haugs-nes, Þórsnes (W.), Th. 9.

<p>Hauka-dalr, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 13. 4, 6: Gen. B. 10: Mant. 1. 7: Lib. 9. 2; 10. 10: Cr. 4. 3; 10. 8: Hv. I. 2; 3. 1, 7: Io. 3.

<p>Hauka-dalr, Breiðafiarðardaler (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Hauka-dalr, S. of Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 7&ndash;8.

<p>Hauka-dals-&aoacute;, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 9.

<p>Hauka-gil, Vatzdalr (N.), Cr. 2. 1.

<p>Hauks-staðir (al. -grafir), Langadalr, III. 6. 3.

<p>Hávarar-lón, Melrakkaslétta (N.), III. 22. 3.

<p>Héðens-h&aolig;fðe, E. of Skialfande (N.), III. 6. 6; 18. 1.

<p>Hefne, Norðm&oeacute;rr, Norway, III. 5. 1: V. 9. 7.

<p>Hegg-gerðis-múle (al. Hregg-), Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 3.

<p>Hegra-nes, S. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 2.

<p>Hegra-nes-þing, Cr. 2. 6.

<p>Heiða-b&oeacute;r, W. of Olfusvatn (S.), V. 16. 3.

<p>Heiðr (Mosfells-heiðr), E. of Reykjavík (S.), I. 3. 7&ndash;8: IV. 13. 1: V. 14. 1.

<p>Heina-bergs-&aoacute;, W. of Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 7, 9.

<p>Hekla, Heklo-fell, = Hecla, the famous volcano (S.), Hv. 2. 20; 5. 13: Pol. 7. 6; 15. 2.

<p>Helga-fell, on Þórsnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 10. 2: Gen. A. 36; B. 14: Th. 4; 11: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Helga-hváll, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 4.

<p>Helga-sker, off Skriðinsenne (W.), II. 30. 4.

<p>Helga-staðer, Reykjadalr, Skialfande (N.), III. 17. 2; 19. 1.

<p>Helga-vatn, S. of Breiðabólstaðr, Vatz-dal (N.), III. 5. 3, 6.

<p>Helga-vatn, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 2, 4, 12 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Helkundo-heiðr, W. of Finnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 1. 1.

<p>Hellir Surtz, N. of Geitland (S.), III. 11. 2.

<p>Hellis-dalr, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 8.

<pb id=pb776 n=776><p>Hellis-fi&aolig;rðr, SE. of Norðrfi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 4.

<p>Hellis-fitjar, near Surtz-heller (S.), I. 10. 2.

<p>Hellis-hraun, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 12; 6. 1.

<p>Hengi-fors-&aoacute;, runs into Fliótz&aoacute;, S. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 1; 5. 2.

<p>Heraðs-vað, Skáney, Sweden, Pol. 3. 4.

<p>Herfurða, Saxony, Mant. 3. 2: Cr. 10. 1: Hv. 1. 2: Io. 1. 2; 3. 3.

<p>Hergils-ey, in Breiðafi&aolig;rðr, NW. of Flatey (W.), II. 17. 4.

<p>Herjolfs-dalr, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), V. 3. 7.

<p>Herjolfs-fi&aolig;rðr, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Herjolfs-h&aolig;fn, Faxafi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 2. 3.

<p>Herjolfs-nes, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Hernar, H&aolig;rðafylke, Norway, I. 1.

<p>Hest-fi&aolig;rðr, Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 25. 2.

<p>Hest-l&oeacute;kr, Grímsnes (S.), Cr. 4. 4.

<p>Heydala-l&aolig;nd, Breiðdalr (E.), IV. 11. 4.

<p>Heydaler, Breiðdalr (E.), Gen. A. 29.

<p>Hialla-nes, the northernmost promontory of Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 23. 1, 3.

<p>Hialle, Olfus (S.), V. 9. 8: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Hialta-dalr, runs into Skagafi&aolig;rðr from the SE. (N.), III. 9. 4; 10. 1: Gen. B. 15: Mant. 4. 2: Cr. 1. 3; 10. 7: Hv. 2. 9: Io. 7. 1.

<p>Hialt-d&oeacute;la-laut, between Þorskafi&aolig;rðr and Steingrímsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), III. 10. 2.

<p>Hialtland, = Shetland, I. 1; 2. 3: III. 16. 1.

<p>Hiarðar-holt, Laxárdalr (W.), II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 13: Cr. 10. 9.

<p>Hiarðar-nes, E. of Vatzfi&aolig;rðr, Barða&shy;str&aolig;nd (W.), II. 17. 6; 20. 9.

<p>Hiarðar-vatn (cod. Hardns-vatn), near Hraunsfi&aolig;rðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 4.

<p>Hierosalem, = Jerusalem, Lib. 10. 12: Io. 13. 5.

<p>Hildis-ey, Landeyjar (S.), V. 7. 23.

<p>Hildis-haugr, near Kirkjob&oeacute;r, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 5.

<p>Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe, Skaptafellsþing (E.), I. 3. 7: Od. 1. 3.

<p>Hirtir, = S. Kilda, p. 613.

<p>Hísar-gafl, H&aolig;rðafylke, Norway, I. 3. 2.

<p>Hising, in Gautelfr, on the borders of Norway and Sweden, Gen. B. 16.

<p>Hit-ár-dalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 3, 14; 11. 8; 30. 1: Hv. 4. 10&ndash;11: Pol. 6. 3; 14. 1: Od. 4. 2.

<p>Hitar-nes, N. of Hit&aoacute; (W.), Cr. 5. 2.

<p>Hit-&aoacute;, Hitárdalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 13&ndash;15; (Hitar-&aoacute;) 5. 5: Cr. 5. 1, 3.

<p>Hlað-hamarr, Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 1.

<pb id=pb777 n=777><p>Hleiðrar-garðr, W. of Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

<p>Hlíð, Fliótzdals-hérað (E.), p. 606.

<p>Hlíð, = Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 5. 2 (<hi>S</hi>); 6. 2; 7. 2; 8. 6.

<p>Hlíð, = I&aolig;kulsárhlíð, N. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (E.), IV. 3. 4.

<p>Hlíð, = Sæmundarhlíð, S. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 6.

<p>Hlíð en ýtre, = Úthlíð, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 14. 7: Gen. A. 14.

<p>Hlíð, Þorskafi&aolig;rðr, II. 17. 4.

<p>Hliðar, Vestfold, Norway, III. 13. 2.

<p>Hlíðar-ende, Fliótzhlíð (S.), IV. 7. 2; 18. 1: V. 4. 4; 5. 2; 7. 1&ndash;2, 8: Gen. A. 5; 11: Thorl. 1. 1.

<p>Hlíðar-l&aolig;nd, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 14. 7.

<p>Hl&aolig;ðo-vík, W. of Horn (W.), II. 35. 1.

<p>Hlym-daler (cod. Hringdaler), Norway, Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Hlymrek(e), Limerick, Ireland, II. 19. 2.

<p>Hnióska-dalr (or Fnjóskadalr), Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 16. 1.

<p>Hniósk-&aoacute;, runs from the SE. into Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 16. 2.

<p>Hnit-bi&aolig;rg (al. Hvít-), Kiarradalr, II. 2. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Hof, Álftafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 12. 2.

<p>Hof, Goðdaler (N.), III. 8. 1.

<p>Hof, Hialtadalr (N.), III. 7. 1; 10. 1; 11. 2.

<p>Hof, Kialar-nes (S.), I. 5. 1.

<p>Hof, Pappýle, IV. 14. 8.

<p>Hof, N. of Eastern Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 2; 6. 2; 7. 8: Gen. A. 1: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Hof (Hofsl&aolig;nd), Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 2. 2; 3. 1: Gen. A. 28: Mant. 4. 2: Hv. 2. 1.

<p>Hof (Hofsland), Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 3, 12. 13.

<p>H&aolig;fða-brecka, W. of Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 17. 2: Gen. A. 22.

<p>H&aolig;fða-brecko-land (E.), Od. 2. 3.

<p>H&aolig;fð-ár-sandr, W. of Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 18. 5.

<p>H&aolig;fða-str&aolig;nd, E. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 12; II. 1.

<p>H&aolig;fðe, on the E. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), II. 15. 13: III. 16. 2: IV. 2. 3.

<p>H&aolig;fðe, = Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 18. 3, 6&ndash;7.

<p>H&aolig;fðe, H&aolig;fðastr&aolig;nd (N.), III. 6. 6; 7. 1; 9. 2; 11. 5: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 2. 2.

<p>H&aolig;fðe (or H&aolig;fða-l&aolig;nd), Biskupstungor (S.), V. 7. 2; 12. 4; 14. 8: Cr. 10. 1.

<pb id=pb778 n=778><p>H&aolig;fð-&aoacute;, W. of Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), Od. 2. 3.

<p>Hóf-garðar, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 11.

<p>H&aolig;fn, Melasveit, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 11, 13: (?) II. 9. 3: Cr. 5. 6.

<p>Hofs-fell, near the head of Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 6.

<p>Hof-staðer, Northern Reykjadalr (S.), I. 11. 3.

<p>Hof-staðer, in the North of Bl&aolig;ndohlíð, III. 8. 10.

<p>Hof-staðer, Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 5.

<p>Hof-staðer, Þórsnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 10. 1: Th. 4; 9.

<p>Hófs-teigr, W. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (E.), IV. 3. 5.

<p>Hofs-vágr, W. of Þórsnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 10. 1: Th. 4.

<p>H&aolig;gna-staðer, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 2.

<p>H&aolig;ko-staðer, Norðrárdalr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

<p>Hólar (= Hrepp-hólar), Hrunamanna&shy;hreppr (W.), V. 13. 5; 15. 2.

<p>Hólar, = Reykjahólar (W.), II. 19. 1.

<p>Hólar, Vestrhóp (N.), III. 3. 1.

<p>Hólar (the bishop&apos;s See), Hialtadalr (N.), Mant. 1. 5; 4. 1: Lib. 9. 1; 10. 11; Epil.: Cr. 2. 3; 10. 7&ndash;8: Hv. 1. 7; 2. 9; 3. 5, 13; 4. 9; 5. 1, 9, 13: Thorl. 12. 4: Pol. 6. 3; 7. 3; 12. 2: Io. 7. 1; 8. 2; 9. 1; 12&ndash;13: pp. 592&ndash;4, &amp;c.

<p>Hóll, (?) Norway, V. 16. 1.

<p>Holmgarðr, = Novgorod, Russia, III. 2. 1: Cr. 3. 4.

<p>Holmkels-&aoacute;, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3.

<p>Holmr enn iðre, Akranes (S)., I. 7. 2, 4, 6; 11. 3.

<p>Holmr (Holmsl&aolig;nd), Hitárdalr (W.), II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

<p>Holmr, = Níðarholmr, Cr. 6. B&ast; (p. 395).

<p>Holms-látr, Skógarstr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 11. 7; 12. 4; 13. 1.

<p>Holms-l&aolig;nd, between Fisk&aoacute; and Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 7. 9.

<p>Holms-&aoacute;, runs from the NW. into Skapt&aoacute; (E.), IV. 17. 5; 18. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Holt, under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), I. 7. 4; V. 3. 3.

<p>Holt (Holta-l&aolig;nd), Flóe (S.), V. 7. 2; 11. 2; 12. 1.

<p>Holt, Holkamýrar (N.), Thorv. 7.

<p>Holt, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 2.

<p>Holt, Fliót, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 4.

<p>Holta-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 4.

<p>H&aolig;rða-dalr, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 3.

<p>H&aolig;rða-dals-&aoacute;, H&aolig;rðadalr (W.), II. 15. 1.

<pb id=pb779 n=779><p>H&aolig;rða-hólar, Hvítársíða (S.), II. 3. 3.

<p>H&aolig;rða-land, a province of Norway, I. 2. 3: II. 24. 3: III. 19. 1: V. 2. 2: Gen. A. 38; B. 15.

<p>H&oelig;rga-eyrr, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), Cr. 8. 2.

<p>H&oelig;rg-ár-dalr, on the W. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 8, 14&ndash;15, 19.

<p>H&oelig;rg-ár-dals-&aoacute;, = H&oelig;rg&aoacute; (N.), III. 14. 9.

<p>H&oelig;rg-&aoacute;, runs from the SW. into Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 13.

<p>H&aolig;rgs-holt, Hnappadals-sýsla (W.), II. 5. 7.

<p>H&aolig;rgs-land, Síða (E.), pp. 417&ndash;18.

<p>Horn (et eystra), between Hornafi&aolig;rðr and Lón (E.), I. 1; 2. 3: IV. 9. 3; 13. 3; 14. 3, 5.

<p>Horn (et vestra), Hornstrander (W.), II. 17. 6; 25. 1; 27. 2.

<p>Hornafiarðar-str&aolig;nd, the coast at Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 5.

<p>Hornafi&aolig;rðr, W. of Horn (E.), IV. 14. 3: V. 1. 1.

<p>Horn-strander, the NE. coast of the West Quarter, II. 12. 1.

<p>H&aolig;scullz-ár, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3.

<p>H&aolig;scullz-ey, in Breiðafi&aolig;rðr, NW. of Þórsnes (W.), Th. 11. 4.

<p>H&aolig;scullz-l&oeacute;kr, in the S. of Grímsnes (S.), V. 14. 3.

<p>H&aolig;scullz-staðer, Laxárdalr (W.), II. 20. 7.

<p>H&aolig;scullz-vatn, near Búrfell (N.), III. 18. 2.

<p>Hrafnista, off  Hálogaland, Norway, I. 8. 1: II. 22. 2: V. 4. 1: Gen. A. 31.

<p>Hrafnkels-dalr, I&aolig;kulsdalr (E.), IV. 6. 3.

<p>Hrafnkels-staðer, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), Gen. A. 30.

<p>Hrafns-fi&aolig;rðr, I&aolig;kulfirðer (W.), II. 26. 6.

<p>Hrafns-fi&aolig;rðr, Greenland, II. 12. 3, 9.

<p>Hrafns-haugr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

<p>Hrafns-tofter, on Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 2.

<p>Hranafall (?), II. 3. 5.

<p>Hrana-staðer, Hálsasveit, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 10. 6.

<p>Hraun, on Hvít&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), II. 1. 1.

<p>Hraun (= Berserkja-hraun), on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 5.

<p>Hraun, beside Saxahváll, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

<p>Hraun-dalr (2), between Alpt&aoacute; and Hit&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 13.

<pb id=pb780 n=780><p>Hraun-gerðe, Flóe (S<corr>.</corr>), I. 7. 12; Hv. 1. 2.

<p>Hraun-gerðinga-hreppr, Flóe (S.), I. 7. 12: V. 11. 5.

<p>Hraun-h&aolig;fn, N. of Melrakka-slétta (N.), III. 22. 4.

<p>Hraun-h&aolig;fn, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 11.

<p>Hrauns-áss, Hálsasveit, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 11. 3: II. 2. 1.

<p>Hrauns-fi&aolig;rðr, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2&ndash;3; 9. 2: Th. 6.

<p>Hrauns-holtz-l&oeacute;kr, Alftanes (S.), V. 16. 12.

<p>Hrauns-l&oeacute;kr, W. of Þiórs&aoacute;, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 1.

<p>Hreðo-vatn, N. of Norðr&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 12.

<p>Hregg-gerðís-Múle, <hi>see</hi> Hegg-.

<p>Hreiðars-gerðe, near Laugarbrecka, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

<p>Hringa-ríke, a district in E. Norway, I. 4. 5: II. 9. 1: III. 13. 3: Mant. 5.

<p>Hring-staðer, Vestrhóp (N.), III. 3. 1.

<p>Hrip, on Kaldár-óss (W.), II. 5. 3.

<p>Hrísar, Flókadalr, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 9. 6.

<p>Hrísey, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 2, 4.

<p>Hróars-l&oeacute;kr, runs from the NE. into Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 2; 8. 7; 11. 6.

<p>Hrolleifs-dalr, on the E. side of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 12; 11. 3.

<p>Hrolleifs-dals-&aoacute;, Hrolleifsdalr (N.), III. 11. 1.

<p>Hrómundar-staðer (= Kallsbrecka), Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 1.

<p>Hrossa-garðr, NE. of H&aolig;fðabrecka (E.), IV. 17. 2.

<p>Hruna-manna-hreppr, the district between Lax&aoacute; and Hvit&aoacute; (S.), V. 13. 4&ndash;6.

<p>Hrúta-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd, the (eastern) side of Hrúta-fi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 1. 1.

<p>Hrúta-fi&aolig;rðr, Húnaflóe (W. and  N.), I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3; 30. 1&ndash;3: III. 1. 2; 5. 2, 16; 20. 5.

<p>Hrútz-staðer, Kambsnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 10: Gen. A. 35.

<p>Húna-vatn, S. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 9; 21. 3.

<p>Húna-vatz-þing, the  moot, or moot-district of Húnavatn (N.), III. 5. 16.

<p>Hunda-dalr, SE. of Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 5.

<p>Húns-nes, on W. side of Þistilfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 22. 6.

<p>Húsa-fell, <corr sic="Borgarfi&aolig;rdr">Borgarfi&aolig;rðr</corr> (W.), Gen. B. 14.

<p>Húsa-garðr, on Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 5.

<pb id=pb781 n=781><p>Húsa-vík, between Breiðavík and Loð&shy;mundar-fi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 9. 1.

<p>Húsa-vík, on the E. side of Skialfande (N.), I. 2. 1: III. 17. 2; 18. 2; 19. 1.

<p>Hval-eyrr, beside Hafnarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 2. 3.

<p>Hval-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd, N. of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 7: Od. 3. 2.

<p>Hval-fi&aolig;rðr, between Akranes and Kialarnes (S.), I. 3. 8: II. 1. 1.

<p>Hváll (= Arnar-hváll), E. of Eyjafiarðar-&aoacute; (N.), III. 15. 10.

<p>Hváll (= Stórolfs-hváll), between Þver&aoacute; and Eastern Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 7 <hi>n.</hi>; 7. 4.

<p>Hval-látr, E. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 16. 3.

<p>Hval-látr, Keflavík (W.), II. 21. 4.

<p>Hvals-ey, Greenland, II. 12. 10.

<p>Hvals-eyjar-fi&aolig;rðr, Greenland, II. 12. 10.

<p>Hváls l&oeacute;kr, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 4. 7 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Hvals-nes-skriðor, between Hamarsfi&aolig;rðr and Alftafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 11. 3, 8.

<p>Hval-vatz-fi&aolig;rðr, between Eyjafi&aolig;rðr and Skialfande (N.), III. 16. 4.

<p>Hvammr, Bl&aolig;ndohlíð, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 11.

<p>Hvammr, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 5. 8; 14. 8; 15. 10; 20. 2; 23. 2: III. 11. 2: Gen. A. 1 <hi>n.</hi>: Th. 6; 9: Lib. epil.: Cr. 2. 2.

<p>Hvammr, S. of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 7.

<p>Hvammr, Mýdalr (E.), IV. 18. 1.

<p>Hvammr, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 4, 5.

<p>Hvammr, Olfus (S.), V. 16. 4.

<p>Hvammr, Þórsárdalr (W.), Th. 8. 2.

<p>Hvamms-daler, <hi>see</hi> Hvanndaler.

<p>Hvamms-fi&aolig;rðr, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), Gen. A. 36.

<p>Hvann-daler, NW. of Óláfsfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 7.

<p>Hvann-eyrr, Andakíl, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 8. 2: II. 7. 2: III. 5. 2: Cr. 1. 4.

<p>Hvann-&aoacute;, runs from the W. into I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (E.), IV. 3. 4.

<p>Hvarf, = Cape Wrath, Scotland, p. 613.

<p>Hvarf, = Cape Farewell, Greenland, I. 1: II. 12. 3.

<p>Hvarfs-gnípa, the extremity of Cape Farewell, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

<p>Hvassa-hraun, between Rosmhvalanes and Alftanes (S.), V. 16. 9&ndash;10, 12.

<p>Hvata-staðer, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 5.

<p>Hviner, Agðer, Norway, III. 13. 2; 15. 2&ndash;3: Mant. 5.

<pb id=pb782 n=782><p>Hvinis-fi&aolig;rðr, Agðer, III. 13. 2.

<p>Hvin-verja-dalr, in the centre of Iceland, III. 15. 4.

<p>Hvíta-nes, Landeyjar (S.), Nj. p. 367.

<p>Hvít-ár-backe, S. of Hvít&aoacute; (S.), II. 1. 1.

<p>Hvít-ár-síða, N. of Hvit&aoacute; (W.), I. 7. 10: II. 2. 1.

<p>Hvít-&aoacute;, between Biskupstungor and Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 14. 6.

<p>Hvít-&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (dividing the West and South Quarters), I. 10. 1; 11. 1: II. 1. 1; 2. 1; 3. 1, 3: Cr. 5 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Hvítra-manna-land, or Írland et Mykla, S. of Wineland, America, II. 19. 2.

<p>H&aeacute;ll, on Lax&aoacute;, Árness þing (S.), V. 13. 2.



<div3 id=ixnI>
<head>I</head>


<p>Iaðarr, Rogaland, Norway, II. 12, 1: III. 12. 7; 14, 19.

<p>Íafi&aolig;rðr, Norway, II. 11. 7.

<p>Iamna-skarð, W. of Norðr&aoacute;, Mýrar, (W.), II. 3. 12.

<p>Iamta-land, a district of Sweden, V. 15. 1: Th. 1. 1; 2. 1.

<p>Iarð-fallz-gil, on the N. side of Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 23. 2.

<p>Iarðlangs-staðer, E. of Lang&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 7.

<p>Iárn-meis-h&aolig;fðe, S. of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), Cr. 5. 6.

<p>Ierusalem, Cr, 10. 9 (cf. Hierosalem, Iorsala-heimr).

<p>Ílo-veller, Þrándheimr, Norway, Thorl. 15. 1.

<p>Ingiallz-gnúpr, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 6.

<p>Ingiallz-hváll, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3.

<p>Ingiallz-sandr, on the S. side of Onundarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 23. 3; 24. 1.

<p>Ingimundar-holt, Víðedalr (N.), III. 5. 2.

<p>Ingolfs-fell, west of Olfus&aoacute; (S.), I. 3. 7: IV. 14. 3: V. 16. 4: Lib. 1. 2.

<p>Ingolfs-fi&aolig;rðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Ingolfs-h&aolig;fða-hverfe, the district at Ingolfs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 15. 3.

<p>Ingolfs-h&aolig;fðe, Skaftafellzþing (E.), I. 3. 7: IV. 9, 3: Lib. 1. 2.

<p>I&aolig;kul-firðer, on the N. side of Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II, 27. 1.

<p>I&aolig;kuls-dalr, W. from Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 3. 7.

<p>I&aolig;kuls-fell, NW. of Skaftafell (E.), IV. 15. 2.

<p>I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute;, Breiðársandr (E.), IV. 14. 10.

<p>I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute;, I&aolig;kulsdalr (E.), IV. 3. 6&ndash;7.

<p>I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute;, Lón (E.), IV. 13. 1, 3.

<pb id=pb783 n=783><p>I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute; (= Heraðsv&aolig;tn), Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 8.

<p>I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute; (= Skeiðar&aoacute;), runs S. from I&aolig;kulsfell (E.), IV. 15. 3.

<p>I&aolig;kuls-&aoacute;, Sólheimasandr (S.), IV. 9. 3&ndash;4; 19. 1: V. 2. 2.

<p>Ioldo-hlaup, Ireland, I. 1.

<p>Ioldo-steinn, Langanes (S.), V. 3. 4; 6. 1: Gen. A. 8.

<p>Iólgeirs-staðer, between Rauðal&oeacute;kr and Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 9.

<p>Iorsala-borg, = Jerusalem, Hv. 2. 16.

<p>Iorsala-heimr, = Jerusalem, Cr. 9. 1.

<p>Iorsalir, = Jerusalem, Lib. 10. 12 : Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 2. 16; 3. 11: Io. 13. 5.

<p>I&aolig;rundar-fell, E. of Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

<p>I&aolig;rundar-holt ( = Garðar), Akranes (S.), I. 7. 3.

<p>I&aolig;rve, Haukadalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Iosur-heið, an island in Sunnm&oeacute;rr, Norway, V. 2. 1.

<p>Iótland, = Jutland, Denmark, Cr. 3. 1.

<p>Írland, Ireland, I. 1; 3. 4; 7. 2&ndash;3: II. 14. 1; 19. 3; 20. 3; 22. 2: III. 13. 2: IV. 17. 5: V. 16. 2: Gen. B. 15: Cr. 3. 3: Hv. 2. 20; epil.

<p>Írland et mikla, <hi>see</hi> Hvítramanna-land.

<p>Ír-&aoacute;, under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), I. 7. 4: V. 3. 3.

<p>Ísafiarðar-diúp, the outer part of Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 24. 5.

<p>Ísa-fi&aolig;rðr, in the NW. of Iceland (W.), II. 18. 2; 24. 5.

<p>Ísland, Iceland, Prol. I, 1, and <hi>passim</hi>.

<p>Íslannz-haf, the sea between Iceland and Norway, IV. 15. 1.

<p>Ísleifs-staðer, (?) Hvítársíða (W.), II. 3. 3.

<p>Ísr&oelig;ðar-staðer, (?) Hvítársíða (W.), II. 3. 3.



<div3 id=ixnK>
<head>K</head>


<p>Kalda-kinn, near D&aolig;gorðarnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 16. 2.

<p>Kalda-kinn, on the SW. side of Skialfande (N.), III. 16. 1; 17. 3.

<p>Kalda-klofs-&aoacute;, Sólheimasandr (S.), V. 2. 3; 3. 1.

<p>Kalda-kvísl, E. from Upper Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 13. 6; 14. 6.

<p>Kald-ár-óss, the mouth of Kald&aoacute; (W.), II. 5. 3.

<p>Kald-nesinga-hreppr, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 4.

<p>Kald-&aoacute;, N. of Hvit&aoacute; (W.), II. 4. 14; 5. 5.

<p>Kalfa-grafer, near Kirkjob&oeacute;r, Síða (E.), IV. 7. 2.

<p>Kalfa-l&oeacute;kr, S. of Hitar&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 3.

<pb id=pb784 n=784><p>Kalf-borgar-&aoacute;, on the E. side of Bárðardalr (N.), III. 17. 1; 20. 3.

<p>Kalf-&aoacute;, runs into Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 12. 5; 13. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Kalf-skinn, Árskógstr&aolig;nd, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 11.

<p>Kalfs-staðer, Hialtadalr (N.), p. 609.

<p>Kall-bakr, -baksvík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1.

<p>Kalls-brecka, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 1.

<p>Kalmans-&aoacute;, N. of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 2, 8: II. 1. 1.

<p>Kalmans-tunga, between upper Hvít&aoacute; and Norðlinga-fliót (S.), II. 1. 1: Gen. B. 14.

<p>Kamb, Svarfaðardalr (N.), p. 320. 5.

<p>Kamba-kista (?), V. 11. 5.

<p>Kambr, Breiðavík, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 2.

<p>Kambs-nes, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 4. 15; 14. 7; 15, 10. (Cam-nes): V. 6. 2.

<p>Kampa-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 1.

<p>Kams-dalr (now Geithella-dalr), S. Alftafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 12. 3.

<p>Karla-fi&aolig;rðr (?), V. 13. 5.

<p>Karla-staðer, (?) Borgarfi&aolig;rðr, II. 1. 2.

<p>Karla-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

<p>Karls-dalr, Norðrárdalr, above Hreðovatn (W.), II. 3. 12.

<p>Karls-fell, Karlsdalr (W.), II. 3. 12.

<p>Karls-&aoacute;., on the W. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 5.

<p>Kárns-ár-land, W. of Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 10.

<p>Kárs-staðer, Alftafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 11. 3.

<p>Kata-nes, Caithness, Scotland, I. 6. 5: II. 14. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Kata-nes, N. of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 2.

<p>Kata-nes, W. of Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 3. 4.

<p>Kaupangr, Níðaróss, Norway, Pol. 3. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Kefla-vík, W. of Rauðasandr, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 21. 4.

<p>Keldo-dalr, S. of. Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 6.

<p>Keldo-gnúpr, E. of Geirlandz&aoacute;, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 3.

<p>Keldo-hverfe, -nes, S. of &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 20. 2, 4&ndash;5.

<p>Keldor, N. of Eastern Rang&aoacute; (S.), Gen. A. 10: Od. 6. 6.

<p>Kerlingar-fi&aolig;rðr, near Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 18. 5.

<p>Kerlingar-&aoacute;, W. of Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 18. 8.

<p>Kers-eyrr, W. of Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (W,), II. 30. 3.

<pb id=pb785 n=785><p>Ketils-eyrr, S. of Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 23. 1.

<p>Ketils-fi&aolig;rðr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Ketils-staðer, H&aolig;rðadalr (W.), II. 15. 2; 16. 1.

<p>Ketils-staðer, E. of Lagarfliót near Vallanes (E.), IV. 5. 4.

<p>Kialar-nes, on the SW. side of Esja (S.), I. 3. 10; 5. 1; 6. 3: II. 14. 6: Lib. 3. 1: p. 327. 14: Cr. 3. 5.

<p>Kialka-fi&aolig;rðr (Cialka-), Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 20. 9.

<p>Kiallaks-hóll (Ceallacs-), above Kiallaks-staðer (W.), II. 16. 2.

<p>Kiallaks-staðer (Ceallacs-), E. of D&aolig;gorðarnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 16. 1: Th. 9. 2.

<p>Kiarans-vík (Cearans-), W. of Horn (W.), II. 17. 6.

<p>Kiarra-dalr, above Ornolfsdalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 2. 5.

<p>Kiarr-&aoacute;, Kiarradalr (W.), II. 2. 5.

<p>Kiartans-gi&aoacute;, Eilífsfell (N.); Thorv. 6.

<p>Kiðja-berg, in the S. of Grímsnes (S.), I. 10. 3: II. 26. 3: V. 15. 2.

<p>Kiðja-fell, S. of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 6. 5.

<p>Kiðja-leit, near I&aolig;kulsfell (E.), IV. 15. 2.

<p>Ki&aolig;lr, in the centre of Iceland, III. 7. 7&ndash;8; 8. 9; 15. 4.

<p>Ki&aolig;lr, between Norway and Sweden, Th. 1. 2 (Ki&aolig;lo); 2. 1.

<p>Kiolvarar-staðer, Reykjadalr, I. 10. 4: II. 26. 3.

<p>Kiós, S. of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 6. 5.

<p>Kirkjo-bólstaðr, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 4.

<p><corr sic="Kirjo-b&oeacute;r">Kirkjo-b&oeacute;r</corr>, on Hróarsl&oelig;kr, Rangár-veller (S.), V. 7. 8: Gen. A. 15.

<p>Kirkjo-b&oeacute;r, Síða (E.), II. 21. 1. (<hi>S</hi>): IV. 16. 1, 5: Gen. A. 23: Cr. 4. 3: Thorl. 5. 1; 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Kirkjo-fell, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 5.

<p>Kirkjo-fi&aolig;rðr, Eyrarsveit, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 8; 8. 1.

<p>Kirkjo-sandr, Holmr, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 6.

<p>Kleifar, Gilsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 4.

<p>Kleifar, N. of Biarnarfi&aolig;rðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Kleifar-l&aolig;nd, Breiðdalr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 11. 1.

<p>Klif, between Kiarr&aoacute; and Þver&aoacute; (W.), II. 2. 5.

<p>Klofa-steinar, N. of Búðardalr, Skarðz&shy;str&aolig;nd (W.), II. 17. 3; 18. 1.

<p>Klofe, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 4.

<pb id=pb786 n=786><p>Klofningar, NE. of D&aolig;gorðarnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 16. 1; 17. 6.

<p>Knafa-hólar, NE. of Reyðarvatn (S.), V. 7. 7.

<p>Knappa-dalr (now Hnappa-dalr), E. from Haffiarðar&aoacute; (W.), II. 4. 15; 5. 2: Io. 14. 1.

<p>Knapp-staðer, S. of Fliót, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 1.

<p>Knarrar-nes, off Mýrar (W.), I. 8. 1.

<p>Knarrar-sund, E. of Stokkseyrr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

<p>Knefils-dals-&aoacute;, runs from the S. into I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (E.), IV. 3. 6.

<p>Kolbeins-ár-óss, on the E. side of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 9; 9. 3.

<p>Kolbeins-dalr, runs from the E. into Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 9. 4.

<p>Kolbeins-ey, N. from Iceland, I. 1.

<p>Kolbeins-staðer, between Kald&aoacute; and Haffiarðar&aoacute; (W.), II. 5. 5.

<p>Kolbeins-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Kol-grafa-fi&aolig;rðr, E. of Eyrarsveit, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 1.

<p>Kol-grafer, on Kolgrafafi&aolig;rðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

<p>Kolko-mýrar, SE. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 17.

<p>Kolla-fiarðar-heiðr, N. of Kollafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

<p>Kolla-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Skálanes, Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 20. 6&ndash;7; 26. 4.

<p>Kolla-fi&aolig;rðr, Húnaflóe (W.), II. 29. 4.

<p>Kolla-vík (Kollz-vík), W. of Þistilfi&aolig;rðr near Viðarvík (N.), III. 22. 5.

<p>Kollsveins-staðer, in the N. of Bl&aolig;ndohlíð, Skagafi&aolig;rðr, III. 8. 10.

<p>Kollz-hamarr, beside Kalmanstunga, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 1. 2.

<p>Kollz-l&oeacute;kr, Halsasveit (S.), I. 10. 7.

<p>Kollz-sona-fell, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

<p>Kollz-vík, SW. of Patreksfi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 6. 2: II. 21. 4.

<p>Kols-giá (Cols geá), near Þingv&aolig;llr (S.), Lib. 3. 2.

<p>Kópa-nes, between Tálknafi&aolig;rðr and Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 21. 5.

<p>Kora-nes, W. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 20. 5.

<p>Korna-haugr, near Saxahváll, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

<p>Krauna-heiðr, near Grenjaðarstaðer, Laxárdalr (N.), III. 19. 5.

<p>Krist-nes, S. of the head of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 3: Lib., p. 305. 21.

<p>Krókr, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 8, 10.

<pb id=pb787 n=787><p>Króks-fiarðar-múle, -nes, on the E. side of Króksfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Króks-fi&aolig;rðr, E. of Reykjanes, Gils-fi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 1, 4: III. 21. 3.

<p>Kroppr, W. of Eyjafiarðar&aoacute;, N. of Hrafnagil (N.), III. 14. 15; 19. 1.

<p>Krossa-holt, on Hitar&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 1.

<p>Kross-áss, &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 22. 1.

<p>Krossa-vík, N. of Reyðarfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 10. 5: Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Krossa-vík, Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 3. 2: Gen. B. 15: Mant. 4. 1: (en iðre) IV. 2. 1.

<p>Kross-hólar, E. from Hvammr (W.), II. 14. 8.

<p>Kross-&aoacute;, runs from the E. into Markarfliót (S.), V. 3. 6; 6. 1.

<p>Krums-hólar, between Guf&aoacute; and Lang&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 6.

<p>Krysu-vík, on the S. side of Reykjanes, W. of Selvágr (S.), V. 16. 7, 10.

<p>Kræklinga-hlíð, between Horg&aoacute; and Gler&aoacute;, W. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 20; 15. 3.

<p>Kúða-fliót, in S. of Iceland, W. of Meðall&aolig;nd (E.), IV. 17. 2; 18. 3.

<p>Kúða-fliótz-óss, the mouth of Kúðafliót (E.), IV. 17. 5.

<p>Kvern-vága-str&aolig;nd, Firðafylke, Norway, II. 7. 7.

<p>Kvia-beckr, at the head of Óláfsfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 6.

<p>Kviar-mið, Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 24. 5.

<p>Kvíganda-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Kollafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 7&ndash;8.

<p>Kvíganda-nes, between Kvigandafi&aolig;rðr and Kollafi&aolig;rðr (W,), II. 20. 7.

<p>Kvígo-vága-bi&aolig;rg ( = Vágastape), E. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), V. 16. 10.

<p>Kvígo-vágar ( = Vágar), E. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), V. 16. 3.

<p>Kví-&aoacute;, Breiðársandr (E.), IV. 14. 3, 10; 15. 2, 3.

<p>Kylans-holmr, (?) Geitland (W.), II. 1. 2.

<p>Kænu-garðr, = Kovno, Russia, Cr. 9. 1.



<div3 id=ixnL>
<head>L</head>


<p>Lagar-fliót, Fliótzdalr (E.), IV. 3. 7; 4. 3; 7. 1.

<p>Lagar-fliótz-strander, the shores of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 1.

<p>Lág-ey, near Hi&aolig;rleifs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), IV. 18. 4.

<p>Lamba-fellz-&aoacute;, under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 3. 1&ndash;3.

<p>Lamba-staðer, E. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 12; 20. 5: Gen. B. 13.

<pb id=pb788 n=788><p>Lamba-staðer, (?) Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 5. 2 (<hi>S</hi>).

<p>Landa-mót, near Liósavatn (N.), III. 17. 4.

<p>Land-brot, on I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 8.

<p>Land-draugs-holt, N. of Hitar&aoacute; (W.), Cr. 5. 2.

<p>Land-eyjar, a district in the SW. of Iceland (S.), Gen. A. 8.

<p>Langa-dalr, Blanda, Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 1, 4.

<p>Langa-dalr (outer and inner), Skógarstr&aolig;nd, SE. of Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 6. 4; 11. 7; 12. 2; 13. 1: Th. 7; 9.

<p>Langa-dals-&aoacute;, Skógarstr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 11. 1.

<p>Langa-dals-&aoacute;, E. of Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 26. 2, 5.

<p>Langa-holt, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9.

<p>Langa-holt, E. of Sæmundarhlíð (N.), III. 7. 3.

<p>Langa-nes, in the middle of Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 2, 5.

<p>Langa-nes, the extreme NE. promontory of Iceland (E.), I. 1: IV. 1. 1.

<p>Langanes, E. of Markarfliót (S.), IV. 1 <hi>n.</hi>: V. 3. 4.

<p>Langa-vatz-dalr, N. of Langavatn (W.), II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

<p>Lang-&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 7&ndash;8, 11.

<p>Lauga-b&oeacute;r, or Laugar, Sælingsdalr (W.), Gen. B. 3.

<p>Laugar-áss, E. of Skálholt (S.), Hv. 4. 8.

<p>Laugar-brecka, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 1&ndash;2: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Laugar-dalr, N. of Grímsnes (S.), I. 9. 4: V. 14. 3: Lib. 7. 3: Cr. 8. 10: Hv. 1. 8.

<p>Laugar-dalr, between Sk&aolig;tofi&aolig;rðr and Mióvefi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 26. 1.

<p>Lax-ár-dalr, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 8; 20. 7: Gen. A. 35; B. 13.

<p>Lax-ár-dalr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 6.

<p>Lax-ár-dalr, Lax&aoacute;, Skialfande (N.), III. 19. 5.

<p>Lax-&aoacute;, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 7.

<p>Lax-&aoacute;, runs into Leirárvágr (S.), I. 7. 7&ndash;8, 11.

<p>Lax-&aoacute;, Miklaholts-hreppr, N. of Faxa-óss (W.), II. 5. 2 <hi>n.</hi>, 6.

<p>Lax-&aoacute;, Skógarstr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 11. 8; 13. 1.

<p>Lax-&aoacute;, runs from the S. into Skialfande (N.), III. 18. 2&ndash;3.

<pb id=pb789 n=789><p>Lax-&aoacute;, between Þiórs&aoacute; and Hvít&aoacute; (S.), V. 12. 5; 13. 5.

<p>Leiðolfs-fell, in the NW. corner of Síða (E.), IV. 18. 1.

<p>Leiðolfs-staðer, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

<p>Leiðolfs-staðer, under Leiðolfsfell (E.), IV. 18. 1.

<p>Leik-skálar, Haukadalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Leir-h&aolig;fn, NE. of &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 22. 2.

<p>Leir-&aoacute;, runs into Leirárvágr between Borgarf. and Hvalf. (S.), I. 7. 12.

<p>Leiro-backe, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 3.

<p>Leiro-l&oeacute;kr, W. of Lang&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 11&ndash;12.

<p>Leiro-vágr, beneath Heiðr, S. of Kialarnes (S.), I. 4. 3: IV. 13. 1; 14. 3: V. 16. 3.

<p>Leiro-vágr, Alftafi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 11. 8: Cr. 4. 2.

<p>Leiro-vágs-&aoacute;, S. of Kialarnes (S.), I. 4. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Líðandes-nes, the SW. promontory of Norway, III. 15, 1: V. 8. 2.

<p>Lín-akra-dalr, SE. of Miðfi&aolig;rðr, Húnaflóe (N.), III. 2. 1.

<p>Lincoln, England, Þorl. 4. 2.

<p>Liósa-vatn, W. of Skialfandafliót (N.), III. 16. 1; 17. 2: V, 7. 9: Gen. A. 31: Lib. 5. 5.

<p>Liósa-vatz-skarð, E. of Hnióskadalr (N.), III. 16. 1; 17. 4; 18. 1.

<p>Liótar-staðer, SW. of Síða, near Ásar, (E.), V. 7. 3.

<p>Liótolfs-staðer, &lsquo;in from Kalda-kinn&rsquo; (W.), II. 16. 2.

<p>Liótolfs-staðer, Fellzskógar (W.), II. 16. 2.

<p>Loðmundar-fi&aolig;rðr, N. of Seyðisfi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 9. 1.

<p>Loðmundar-hvammr, = Sólheimar (S.), IV. 9. 3.

<p>Lofót, off Hálogaland, Norway, V. 12. 3.

<p>L&aolig;gberg, the rock of Laws at the Alþing (S.), Lib. 4. 2; 5. 2; 7. 5; p. 329. 4: LC. 18; 28; 29; 32&ndash;4: LS. 6; 8: MM. pp. 350&ndash;3; 355; 358&ndash;9; Nj. p. 367: Cr. 2. 4; 6. 1; 8. 3&ndash;4: Ód. 3. 3.

<p>L&oeacute;kja-mót, Víðedalr (N.), Mant, 6. 2: Cr. 2. 1.

<p>L&oeacute;kjar-botnar, between Outer Rang&aoacute; and Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 3.

<p>L&oeacute;kjar-bugr, S. of Hitar[aó,] Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 2.

<p>Lóma-gnúps-land, Fliótzhverfe (E.), IV. 18. 1.

<pb id=pb790 n=790><p>Lóma-gnúps-sandr, in the S. of Iceland, W. of Ingolfs-h&aolig;fðe (E.), Od. 1. 1.

<p>Lón, between the two Horns, Austfirðer (E.), I. 4. 3: IV. 13. 1, 3: Lib. 2. 3.

<p>Lón (= Skipalón), near the mouth of Horg[aó,] Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 20.

<p>Lóns-land, on the SW. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 1.

<p>Lóns-heiðr, SW. of Alftafi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 13. 1: Cr. 4. 2 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Lunans-holt, Landsveit (S.), V. 9. 6.

<p>Lundar (?), IV. 15. 5.

<p>Lundar-brecka, on the E. side of Bárðardalr (N.), III. 17. 1.

<p>Lundr, Hnióskadalr (N.), III. 16. 1.

<p>Lundr, S. Reykjadalr (S.), I. 11. 2: II. 3. 8.

<p>Lundr, Skáney, Sweden, Hv. 2. 9: Pol. 3. 3.

<p>Lýsa, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9, 11.



<div3 id=ixnM>
<head>M</head>


<p>Magadaborg, Magdeburg, Germany, Hv. 2. 4: Io. 6. 1.

<p>Mána-fell, on the E. side of Skialfanda&shy;fliót (N.), III. 20. 3.

<p>Mána-fors, -gerðe, Kolgomýrar (N.), Thorv. 7.

<p>Mána-&aoacute;, Tiornes (N.), III. 20. 3.

<p>Mána-vík, Skagastr&aolig;nd (N.), III. 6. 5.

<p>Mána-þúfa, Skagastr&aolig;nd (N.), III. 6. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Manna-fallz-brecka, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

<p>Mar-b&oeacute;le, Kræklingarhlíð, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 21.

<p>Markar-fliót, N. and W. of Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V, 3. 4; 4. 2; 5. 1: Gen. A. 2; 8; 9.

<p>Márs-staðer, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 4.

<p>Márs-staðer, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

<p>Máva-hlíð, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 2, 6; 11. 5: Th. 8.

<p>Meðal-fars-sund, between Fyn and Jutland, Denmark, II. 5. 8.

<p>Meðal-fell, Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 5.

<p>Meðal-fell, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 6.

<p>Meðal-fellz-str&aolig;nd, the great promontory in Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 3: Gen. B. 13: Th. 9: Mant. app.

<p>Meðal-l&aolig;nd, S. of Síða (E.), IV. 16. 4.

<p>Mela-hverfe, S. of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 11.

<p>Melar, on the S. side of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), pp. 640&ndash;2.

<p>Melar, Hellisdalr (W.), II. 3. 8.

<pb id=pb791 n=791><p>Melar, at the head of Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 30. 3.

<p>Melracka-dalr, S. of Hvít&aoacute;, near Hrauns-áss (S.), II. 2. 1.

<p>Melracka-nes, N. of Southern Alftafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 12. 3: Cr. 4. 1.

<p>Merki-gil, near Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 14. 10; 15. 6.

<p>Merki-gil, N. of Goðdaler (N.), III. 8. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Merkr-hraun, on the borders of Skeið and Flóe (S.), V. 12. 4.

<p>Merævi, = Moray, Scotland, II. 14. 1.

<p>Mið-b&oeacute;r, (?) Rangárveller (S.), Gen. A. 11.

<p>Mið-enge, Grímsnes (S.), II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

<p>Mið-fell, N. of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 8.

<p>Mið-fi&aolig;rðr, E. of Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 2. 1, 3: p. 329. 6: Nj. p. 368.

<p>Mið-hús, Gnúpverjahreppr (S.), V. 13. 3.

<p>Mið-i&aolig;kull, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

<p>Mígande, on Upsastr&aolig;nd, W. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 7.

<p>Mikils-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

<p>Mikla-b&oeacute;r, E. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), pp. 414&ndash;15.

<p>Mikla-garðr, = Constantinople, I. 1: Gen. B. 5: Lib. 10. 12: Cr. 9. 1.

<p>Mikla-garðr, Keldohverfe (N.), III. 20. 2.

<p>Minþaks-eyrr, W. of Ingolfs-h&aolig;fðe, in the S. of Iceland, I. 3. 7: Lib. 1. 2.

<p>Miola, an island off Hálogaland, Norway, III. 14. 20.

<p>Miors, a lake in Heiðm&aolig;rk, Norway, III. 8. 9.

<p>Mió-synde, (?) Svínadalr (W.), V. 7. 9.

<p>Mióva-dalr, near Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 10.

<p>Mióva-dals-&aoacute;, Fliót, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Mióva-fi&aolig;rðr, Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 26. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Mióva-fi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 2.

<p>Mó-berg, Langadalr, Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 2, 4; 12. 2.

<p>Mó-bergs-breckor, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 1.

<p>Moðolfs-gnúpr, N. of Skaftár-óss (E.), IV. 15. 6.

<p>M&aolig;ðro-fell, W. of Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 15. 6.

<p>M&aolig;ðro-veller, W. of Eyjafiarðar&aoacute;, (N.), Gen. A. 26; 32; B. 15: Mant. 1. 6: Cr. 6. 4; 10. 8: p. 601.

<p>M&aolig;ðro-veller, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 6.

<p>Mó-eiðar-hváll, between Þver&aoacute; and Eastern Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 7 <hi>n.</hi>; 7. 9.

<pb id=pb792 n=792><p>Mó-gils-l&oeacute;kr, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

<p>Mó-gils-&aoacute;, Kialarnes (S.), I. 4. 4; 5. 1; 6. 4.

<p>Molda-tún, Norðm&oeacute;rr, Norway, IV. 17. 1.

<p>Mór, Fliót, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 5.

<p>M&aolig;rk, N. of Kirkjob&oeacute;r, Síða (E.), IV. 19. 2.

<p>M&aolig;rk, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 4.

<p>M&oeacute;rr, a district in Norway, divided into Norð- and Sunn-M&oeacute;rr, III. 15. 12: IV. 14. 1: V. 2. 1: Gen. A. 19; B. 10: Lib. 2. 1.

<p>Mosfell (lower), Mosfellssveit, S. of Kiós (S.), I. 7. 8: II. 4. 1; 7. 2 (?): V. 16. 3: Gen. A. 4 (?): Mant. 5. 5: Lib. 8. 3.

<p>Mosfell (upper), Grímsnes (S.), I. 4. 3: III. 8. 1: V. 14. 3: Gen. A. 13; 14: Mant. 5. 1; Lib. 2. 1; 7. 1; Epil.: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Mostr, an island off Horðaland, Norway, II. 10: 1: Th. 2. 3: Cr. 3. 4.

<p>Múla-fell, Saurb&oeacute;r (W.), Od. 4. 3.

<p>Múle, Southern Alftafi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 12. 2&ndash;3.

<p>Múle, Mosfellssveit (S.), I. 4. 4.

<p>Múle, Saurb&oeacute;r (W.), II. 30. 2.

<p>Múle, near Stacks&aoacute;, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 13. 6.

<p>Munoðar-nes, between Norðr&aoacute; and Gliúfr&aoacute; (W.), II. 4. 4.

<p>Mý-dalr, the SW. corner of the E. Quarter, IV. 18. 1.

<p>Mý-dals-&aoacute;, Kialarnes (S.), I. 5. 1; 6. 5.

<p>Mýrar, a district NW. of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 7. 6; 8. 1: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Mýrar, N. of Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 23. 2.

<p>Mýrar, W. of Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 9.

<p>Myrk-&aoacute;, Horgárdalr (N.), III. 14. 14&ndash;15.

<p>Mýrr, app. on Bardastr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 26. 4.

<p>Mýrr, N. of Þver&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 2.

<p>Mý-vatn, E. of Skialfandafliót (N.), III. 17. 2; 21. 1&ndash;3: Cr. 4. 3.

<p>Mæle-fell, NW. of Goðdaler, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 7. 8; 8. 3.

<p>Mæle-fellz-&aoacute;, and -dalr, running NE. under Mælefell (N.), III. 7. 5&ndash;8.

<p>Mæle-fellz-gil, Biarnardalr (W.), II. 3. 11.

<p>Mærin, Þrándheimr, Norway, IV. 11. 1.



<div3 id=ixnN>
<head>N</head>


<p>Narfa-sker, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 10.

<p>Náttfara-vík, on the SW. side of Skialfande (N.), I. 2. 2: III. 19. 2.

<pb id=pb793 n=793><p>Naumd&oeacute;la-fylke, = Naumodalr, V. 4. 1 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Naumo-dalr, between Þrándheimr and Hálogaland, Norway, II. 4. 1: III. 9. 4; 14. 5: V. 4. 1; 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

<p>Nauta-bú, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 9. 3.

<p>Nes, N. of Norðrfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 10. 3.

<p>Nes (pl.), the SW. nesses of Iceland, II. 20. 3&ndash;4: IV. 14. 3.

<p>Nes, = Þórsnes, Th. 10&ndash;11.

<p>Nes-hraun, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

<p>Niarð-ey, Hálogaland, Norway, II. 17. 1.

<p>Niarð-vík, S. of Héraðsflóe (E.), IV. 4. 1; 8. 1: Gen. A. 19; 27.

<p>Níðar-holmr, now Munkholm, Þrándheimr, Norway, Cr. 6. 4 B.

<p>Níðar-óss, Þrándheimr, Norway, Cr. 5. 2 <hi>n.</hi>; 6. 4 B: Hv. 1. 12: Pol. 3. 1.

<p>Norð-fi&aolig;rðr, S. of Mióvafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 10. 3.

<p>Norðlendinga-fiórðungr, the Northern Quarter of Iceland (N.), III. 1; 5. 16; 22. 6: V. 17. 4: Lib. 5. 3: pp. 329. 5; 339. 8; Nj. p. 368: Cr. 1. 3; 2. 2; 4. 3 B; 8. 7; 10. 6: Hv. 2. 9&ndash;10 : Pol. 12. 1: Io. 6. 3; 7. 1; 11. 2; App.

<p>Norðmandi, = Normandy, IV. 14. 1.

<p>Norð-m&oeacute;rr, Norway, IV. 17. 1.

<p>Norðr-ár-dalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 10; 4. 5.

<p>Norðr-ár-dalr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

<p>Norðr-l&aolig;nd, the Scandinavian countries, I. 2. 3.

<p>Norðr-&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 9; 4. 1.

<p>Norðr-&aoacute;, runs from the E. into I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 1, 6.

<p>Norðr-tunga, between Kiarr&aoacute; and Þver&aoacute; (W.), II. 2. 5 (<hi>M</hi>).

<p>Noregr, Norway, I. 1; 2. 2&ndash;3; 4. 1, 5: II. 14. 1: III. 2. 1; 5. 1, 9; 8. 1; 13. 2: IV. 12. 1; 13. 2; 16. 4: V. 8. 1; 9. 2; 10. 3; 11. 2; 12. 2; 13. 1; 16. 5: Gen. A. 33; B. 5; 13: Th. 1; 2. 2: Mant. 3. 1; 4. 1; 5. 2: Lib., prol. 2; 1. 1, 4; 7. 1, 7, 9; 8. 4; 9. 1, 8; 10. 12: pp. 315. 10; 329. 8: Cr. 2. 7; 3. 4&ndash;5; 8. 8; 10. 2&ndash;3: Hv. 1. 7, 10&ndash;12; 2. 2, 14, 17; 3. 11; 4. 3&ndash;4, 11; 5. 3, 12&ndash;13: Þorl. 1. 1; 7. 5; 8. 1: Pol. 3. 1, 6; 7. 3; 13. 2&ndash;3; 15. 2: Io. 1. 2; 2. 2; 4. 1; 7. 7; 14. 3: Od. 1. 1; 2. 5; 3. 4.

<p>Ný-kome, a branch of Skaft&aoacute; (E.), IV. 16. 1.



<pb id=pb794 n=794>
<div3 id=ixnO>
<head>O</head>


<p>Oddbiarnar-leiðe, Rangárveller (S.), V. 4. 3.

<p>Odde, between the two Rangár (S.), V. 7. 5; 8. 7: Gen. B. 15: Hv. 2. 7: Þorl. 3: Pol. 1&ndash;2: Io. 5. 1: Od. 2. 1&ndash;2; 6. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Odde enn lítle, between the two Rangár (S.). V. 7. 5.

<p>Oddgeirs-hólar, E. of Olfus&aoacute;, Flóe (S.), I. 7. 12: V. 11. 5.

<p>Oddz-áss, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 12.

<p>Ódeila, between Hnjóskadalr and Flateyjardalr (N.), III. 16. 1.

<p>Ófeigs-fi&aolig;rðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 4.

<p>Ofro-staðer, Iaðarr, Norway, Gen. B. 5 (Opro-); 7: Mant. 5. 1.

<p>Ó-færa, <hi>see</hi> U-færa.

<p>Ogurs-vík, between Sk&aolig;tofi&aolig;rðr and Mióvafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 26. 1.

<p>Óláfs-dalr, Gilsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Óláfs-fi&aolig;rðr, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 6, 8.

<p>Ólafs-veller, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 3.

<p>Óláfs-vík, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 4; 18. 3.

<p>Oldo-gróf, N. of Þver&aoacute; (S.), V. 7. 4.

<p>Óleifs-borg (S.), IV. 16. 2.

<p>Olfus, the district S. of Olfusvatn (S.), Cr. 8. 5: Hv. 1. 1.

<p>Olfus-&aoacute;, from Olfusvatn to the sea (S.), I. 3. 8: V. 11. 2: Lib. 1. 2.

<p>Olfus-vatn (S.), I. 3. 8: II. 7. 2: Lib. 7. 4: Cr. 8. 3.

<p>Olvés-haugr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

<p>Olvés-staðer, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2 (<hi>S</hi>).

<p>Omð, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 14. 17; 20. 3.

<p>Ondorð-eyrr, Eyrarsveit, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 1: Th. 7. 2.

<p>Ondorðo-nes, in the S. of Grímsnes (S.), V. 15. 1.

<p>Ondort-nes, the NW. point of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

<p>Ongull, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 16. 5.

<p>Onundar-fi&aolig;rðr, S. of Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 24. 4.

<p>Onundar-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 6.

<p>Opro-staðer, <hi>see</hi> Ofro-staðer.

<p>Orkneyjar, the Orkneys, I. 1: II. 14. 2; 19. 2: III. 22. 1: IV. 14. 2 : V. 13. 5: Th. 1. 2: Pol. 1. 4; 13. 1; 15. 2.

&OElig;rlygs-h&aolig;fn, Patreksfi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 6. 2.

&OElig;rlygs-staðer, Alftafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 11. 6: Th. 8. 2.

<p>Orms-dalr, runs W. from Breiðabólstaðr in Vestrhóp (N.), III. 4. 2.

<pb id=pb795 n=795><p>Orms-&aoacute;, Breiðdalr (E.), IV. 11. 4.

<p>Orms-&aoacute;, runs into Lagarfliót from the W. (E.), IV. 3. 8; 4. 1.

<p>Orms-staðir, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), V. 3. 7.

<p>Ornolfs-dalr, N. of Kiarr&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 2. 5; 3. 3 (-dals&aoacute;): Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Ornolfs-staðer, Kiarradalr (W.), II. 2. 5.

<p>Orrecs-heiðr, N. of Norðrárdalr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

<p>Orrosto-dalr, Flóe (S.), V. 7. 2; 12. 2.

<p>Ósar, Austfirðer (E.), I. 7. 3.

<p>Ós-fi&aolig;ll, SE. of Héraðsflóe (E.), IV. 3. 4.

<p>Óslandz-hlíð, E. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), p. 414.

<p>Osló, Christiania, Norway, Pol. 13. 2.

<p>Ósóme, v. r. for Gers&oelig;me, II. 24. 2.

<p>Óss, Breiðdalr (E.), IV. 11. 5.

<p>Óss, at the head of Miðfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 3. 1.

<p>Óss, Tiornes (N.), III. 20. 1.

<p>Osta, Norway, II. 15. 11: III. 1. 1.

<p>Otra-dalr, S. of Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), Gen. A. 37.

<p>Oxa-l&oeacute;kr (al. Oxna-), SE. of Vallanes (E.), IV. 4. 3.

<p>&OElig;xar-ár-brú, Þingv&aolig;llr (S.), Cr. 6. 1.

<p>&OElig;xar-ár-holmr, at the mouth of &OElig;xar&aoacute; (S.), V. 12. 4.

<p>&OElig;xar-fi&aolig;rðr, between Tiornes and Melrakka-slétta (N.), II. 28. 5: III. 22. 1: Cr. 4. 3.

<p>&OElig;xar-&aoacute;, Bárðardalr, SE. of Liósavatn (N.), III. 17. 4.

<p>&OElig;xar-&aoacute;, runs into Olfusvatn at Þingveller (S.), I. 3. 8: V. 14. 2; 16. 3.

<p>Oxl, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9.

<p>&OElig;xna-dalr, runs from the S. into Horgár&shy;dalr (N.), III. 14. 17.

<p>Oxna-l&oeacute;kr, <hi>see</hi> Oxa-l&oeacute;kr.

<p>&OElig;xn-ey, Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 12. 1.



<div3 id=ixnP>
<head>P</head>


<p>Palltescia, = Polotsk, Russia, Cr. 9. 1.

<p>Papey, off Hamarsfi&aolig;rðr (E.), Prol. p. 13.

<p>Pappýle, (?) Síða, Prol. p. 13: IV. 14. 8.

<p>Paris, Þorl. 4. 2.

<p>Patrecsfi&aolig;rðr, Vestfirðer (W.), I. 6. 2: II. 21. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Pettlandz-fi&aolig;rðr, Pentland Firth, I. 2. 1.



<div3 id=ixnR>
<head>R</head>


<p>Rafta-l&oeacute;kr, old name of Almannafliót (E.), IV. 15. 6.

<p>Rana-staðer, (?) Skaptártunga (E.), IV. 18. 3.

<p>Rangaðar-varða, near the upper sources of the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 8.

<pb id=pb796 n=796><p>Rangár-hverfe, = Rangárveller (S.), Lib. 3. 4.

<p>Rang-ár-óss, the mouth of outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 1; 8. 4: Hv. 2. 3.

<p>Rangár-veller, between the two Rangár (S.), V. 5. 2; 9. 1 (enir eystre): Gen. A. 3: Od. 6. 2.

<p>Rang-ár-veller (Outer), between Outer Rang&aoacute; and Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 3.

<p>Rang-&aoacute;, on the W. side of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 3. 7&ndash;8.

<p>Rang-&aoacute; (Eastern), runs from the NE. into Þver&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 3, 7, 9: Gen. A. 1: Cr. 8. 2 (?): Od. 6. 2.

<p>Rang-&aoacute; (Western or Outer) (S.), V. 7. 6; 8. 7; 9. 1, 5, 8, 11: Cr. 5. 2.

<p>Rangæinga-fiórðungr, the Southern Quarter of Iceland, Lib. 10. 6.

<p>Rauða-biarnar-staðer, E. of Guf&aoacute;, near Eskiholt (W.), II. 4. 5.

<p>Rauða-fell (Eastern), under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 3. 1 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Rauða-gnúpr, the NW. promontory of Melracka-slétta (N.), III. 22. 2.

<p>Rauða-l&oeacute;kr, Hvitársíða (W.), II. 3. 3.

<p>Rauða-l&oeacute;kr, between Þiórs&aoacute; and Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 8.

<p>Rauða-l&oeacute;kr, Oræfe (E.), IV. 15. 4: Od. 1. 2.

<p>Rauða-melr (Outer), West of Haffiarðar&aoacute; (W.), II. 5. 2, 7 (-mels-l&aolig;nd); 15. 14.

<p>Rauða-sandr, NW. of Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 21. 3.

<p>Rauða-skriða, -skriðo-l&aolig;nd, E. of Skial&shy;fandafliót (N.), III. 20. 3, 5.

<p>Rauða-skriðor, Hamarsfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 11. 7.

<p>Rauðkollz-staðer, between Lax&aoacute; and Straumfiarðar&aoacute; (W.), II. 5. 7.

<p>Rauð-&aoacute;, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 6; 11. 2.

<p>Rauðs-gil, (?) Northern Reykjadalr (S.), I. 10. 5.

<p>Raufar-fell, under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 3. 1.

<p>Raufar-nes, Mýrar (W.), I. 7. 6.

<p>Rauma-ríke, Norway, on the borders of Sweden, Th. 1. 1.

<p>Raums-dalr, between Norðm&oeacute;rr and Sunnm&oeacute;rr, Norway, III. 5. 1: V. 3. 4.

<p>Raums-d&oeacute;la-fylke, the district of Raums&shy;dalr, V. 3. 4 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Refs-staðer, SW. of Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 2. 2.

<p>Reistar-gnúpr, &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 22. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Reistar-&aoacute;, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 9.

<p>Reyðar-fell, Hvítársíða, I. 9. 1.

<pb id=pb797 n=797><p>Reyðar-fiall, S. of Reyðafi&aolig;rðr (E.), I. 2. 2 (<hi>S</hi>).

<p>Reyðar-fi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), I. 2. 2: IV. 5. 3; 10. 5: Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Reyðar-múle, between Olfusvatn and Laugardalr (S.), V. 14. 2.

<p>Reyðar-vatn, N. of Eastern Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 5, 7: Gen. A. 12.

<p>Reyðar-vatz-múle, near Reyðarvatn (S.), Gen. A. 12 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Reyker (Upper), SW. of Reykjaholt, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 9. 6.

<p>Reyker, at the head of Miðfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 2. 3.

<p>Reyker, Skeið (S.), Gen. A. 17.

<p>Reykja(r)-dalr (Northern), S. of Hvít&aoacute; (S.), I. 6. 6; 10. 4 (<hi>M</hi>); 11. 3.

<p>Reykja(r)-dalr (Southern), I. 9. 1: Cr. 8. 10.

<p>Reykja(r)-dalr, S. of Skialfande (N.), III. 18. 3; 19. 1&ndash;2: Cr. 1. 3.

<p>Reykja-dals-&aoacute;, Northern Reykjadalr (S.), I. 9. 5; 10. 1.

<p>Reykja-hlíð, NE. of Mývatn (N.), III. 21. 1.

<p>Reykja-hólar, Reykjanes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 4: V. 4. 6: Cr. 4. 4.

<p>Reykja-holt, N. Reykjadalr (S.), I. 11. 2: II. 17. 6; 26. 3: Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 3. 3; 4. 1, 10: Þorl. 11. 6: Od. 4. 3.

<p>Reykja-laug, Laugardalr (S.), Cr. 8. 10.

<p>Reykja-laug, Southern Reykjadalr (S.), Cr. 8. 10.

<p>Reykja-nes, between Berofi&aolig;rðr and Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 19. 1; 21. 6: V. 4. 6 (<hi>M</hi>): Gen. B. 11; 12; 14; 15.

<p>Reykja-nes, the SW. corner of Iceland (S.), I. 1; 2. 3; 7. 6; 8. 1: II. 12. 7: V. 1. 1; 16. 11: Th. 4. 2.

<p>Reykja-&aoacute;, runs from the SE. into Oláfsfiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 12. 8.

<p>Reykjar-dalr, <hi>see</hi> Reykja-dalr.

<p>Reykjar-fi&aolig;rðr, in Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 5.

<p>Reykjar-fi&aolig;rðr (Northern), Horn&shy;strander (W.), Od. 5. 1.

<p>Reykjar-hóll, Fliót, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 5.

<p>Reykjar-str&aolig;nd, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), Thorv. 1.

<p>Reykjar-vík, Seltiarnarnes (S.), I. 3. 8: Lib. 1. 1.

<p>Reykja-veller, near the upper sources of the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 8.

<p>Reyner, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 2.

<p>Reyner, Mýrdalr (E.), IV. 18. 8.

<pb id=pb798 n=798><p>Reynis-nes, NE. of Eyjafi&aolig;ðr (N.), III. 14. 2.

<p>Reyr-v&aolig;llr, Norway, II. 9. 3.

<p>Roðreks-gil, S. of Mælifellzdalr (N.), III. 7. 7.

<p>Róeskelda, = Roskilde, Denmark, Pol. 3. 5.

<p>Rogaland, Norway, I. 2. 3: II. 17. 2&ndash;3; 22. 1: III. 18. 1.

<p>Róm(a), Rome, I. 1: Cr. 10. 10: Hv. 1. 11; 2. 2; 5. 3: Pol. 7. 1: Io. 6. 1.

<p>Róma-borg, Rome, Hv. 2. 18: Io. 7. 5.

<p>Rond, Hringaríke, Norway, Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Ros, Ross, Scotland, II. 14. 1.

<p>Rosm-hvala-nes, the NW. part of Reykjanes (S.), II. 20. 3: V. 16. 3, 9.

<p>Rúða, = Rouen, Normandy, IV. 14. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Ruzia, = Russia, Cr. 9. 1.

<p>Rykin-vík, Rond, Norway, Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Ryta-gnúpr, S. of Aðalvík (W.), II. 17. 6.



<div3 id=ixnS>
<head>S</head>


<p>Salt-eyrar-óss, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 6.

<p>Sand-ár-tunga, Þiórsárdalr (S.), Hv. 4. 7.

<p>Sand-brecka, between Kald&aoacute; and Hit&aoacute; (W.), II. 5. 5.

<p>Sand-dalr, runs into Upper Norðrárdalr above Hvammr (W.), II. 3. 10.

<p>Sand-ey, perh. North Uist, Hebrides, p. 615.

<p>Sand-eyrar-&aoacute;, N. of Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 26. 5&ndash;6.

<p>Sand-fell, S. of Svínafell, Oræfe (E.), IV. 15. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Sand-gil, near Reyðarvatn (S.), V. 7. 7&ndash;8: Gen. A. 12.

<p>Sand-hóla-ferja, near the mouth of Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 5. 2; 7. 2: Gen. A. 5.

<p>Sand-l&oeacute;kr, E. of Skeið (S.), V. 12. 3, 5.

<p>Sand-nes, Hálogaland, Norway, I. 8. 1: V. 4. 1.

<p>Sand-&aoacute;, a tributary of Norðr&aoacute; (W.), II. 3. 9.

<p>Sand-vík, N. of Gerper, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 4.

<p>Sand-vík, Kialarnes (S.), I. 6. 3.

<p>Sand-vík, E. of Viðfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 1. 3.

<p>Sarps-borg, E. of the Vík, Norway, Hv. 4. 3.

<p>Sauða-fellz-l&aolig;nd, SE. of Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 7: Gen. B. 13.

<pb id=pb799 n=799><p>Sauða-nes, SE. of Þistilsfi&aolig;rðr (E.), III. 22. 6.

<p>Sauð-&aoacute;, SW. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 7. 2.

<p>Saur-b&oeacute;r, S. of Gilsfi&aolig;rðr, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 1&ndash;2; 30. 2: Gen. B. 10.

<p>Saur-b&oeacute;r, on Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 31.

<p>Saur-b&oeacute;r, N. of Hvalfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 7. 7, 11: Od. 3. 2; 4. 3.

<p>Saxa-hváll, at the NW. of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

<p>Sax-land, Saxony, Mant. 3. 2: Cr. I. 1; 2. 7; 10. 1: Hv. 1. 3; 2. 1, 4: Io. 1. 2; 3. 3; 6. 1.

<p>Scála-holt (Skálholt), the bishop&apos;s See, on Hvít&aoacute; (S.), Lib. 9. 1; 10. 4; Epil.: LC. 15: Cr. 5. 5 <hi>n.</hi>; 10. 1, 5: Hv. prol.; 1&ndash;5: Þorl. 4. 1; 7. 4&ndash;5; 8. 4; 9. 6; 10. 3; 12. 1&ndash;2 ; 15. 1: Pol. 2. 3; 4&ndash;5; 7. 1; 10. 1; 13. 3; 14. 1&ndash;2: Io. 1. 2; 6. 1&ndash;2; 12. 5; 13&ndash;14; App.: Od. prol.: p. 957.

<p>Scála-holtz-land (S.), Lib. 10. 4: Io. 6. 2.

<p>Scora-dalr, S. of Hvít&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 8. 4: II. 11. 7; 20. 3.

<p>Scor-ey, SW. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 20. 5.

<p>Sel, near Biarnarh&aolig;fn (W.), II. 9. 2.

<p>Sela-eyrr, on the S. side of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 8. 3.

<p>Sela-lón, N. of Mýrar (W.), I. 8. 1.

<p>Sel-ár-dalr, NW. of Steingrímsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 6.

<p>Sel-ár-dalr, N. of Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 2. 3.

<p>Sela-sund, between Purkey and Hrappsey, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 9. 3.

<p>Sel-fors, Kaldnesingahreppr (S.), V. 11. 4.

<p>Selja, S. of Stað, Norway, Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Selja-landz-múle, SW. of Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 3. 4: Gen. A. 8.

<p>Selja-landz-&aoacute;, under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), V. 3. 2.

<p>Sels-l&oeacute;kr, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 5.

<p>Sel-tiarnar-nes, N. of Skerjafi&aolig;rðr (S.), V. 16. 12.

<p>Sel-vágar, Northern Alftafi&aolig;rðr (E.), Cr. 4. 1.

<p>Sel-vágr, S. of Reykjanes (S.), V. 16<corr>.</corr> 7.

<p>Seyðar- or Seyðis-fi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 5. 4; 10. 1: Cr. 8. 7.

<p>Seyðis-fi&aolig;rðr, Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 24. 8.

<p>Síða, a district in the S. of Iceland (E.), <pb id=pb800 n=800>II. 5. 11: III. 21. 1: IV. 14. 4: Gen. A. 25; B. 10; 15: Lib. 2. 1; 7. 1; Epil.: Cr. 8. 7; 10. 7: Hv. 4. 1: Þorl. 5. 1: Io. 1. 1.

<p>Síða, = Hvítársíða (W.), II. 2. 3: III. 11. 2.

<p>Siglo-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 7.

<p>Siglo-fi&aolig;rðr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Siglo-nes, E. of Siglofi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 7; 14. 2.

<p>Siglo-vík, on the E. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 15. 12.

<p>Sigmundar-haugr, at Laugarbrecka, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 3.

<p>Sigmundar-nes, between Gliúfr&aoacute; and Norðr&aoacute; (W.), II. 4. 4.

<p>Sigmundar-staðer, E. of Signýjarstaðer, near Reykjaholt (S.), I. 10. 6.

<p>Signýjar-bruðr, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 16. 5.

<p>Signýjar-staðer, S. of Hvit&aoacute;, N. of Reykjaholt (S.), I. 6. 6; 10. 1.

<p>Silfra-staða-hlíð, between Norðr&aoacute; and I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

<p>Sióland, = Sjælland, Denmark, I. 2. 1: III. 2. 2.

<p>Sireks-staðer, SW. of Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 3. 1.

<p>Skafta-fellz-þing, Oræfe (E), IV. 18. 2, 6.

<p>Skafta-holt, Gnúpverjahreppr(S.), V. 13. 2.

<p>Skaft-&aoacute;, NW. of Síða (E.), IV. 17. 5; 18. 1, 3.

<p>Skaga-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 12; 8. 2; 11. 1: Gen. A. 32; B. 13: Lib. 5. 3: Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Skaga-str&aolig;nd, E. of Húnaflóe (N.), III. 6. 5: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Skage, W. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 9.

<p>Skála-brecka, W. of Olfusvatn (S.), V. 14. 2.

<p>Skála-fell, W. of Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 7.

<p>Skála-fell, near Olfusvatn (S.), I. 3. 8.

<p>Skála-mýrr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 3.

<p>Skála-nes, W. of Gufufi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 6.

<p>Skála-vík, S. of Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 24. 3, 7.

<p>Skáld-skelmis-dalr, Geitland (W.), II. 1. 1.

<p>Skále, Berofi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 11. 6.

<p>Skálholt, <hi>see</hi> Scála-holt.

<p>Skalla-nes, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 1.

<pb id=pb801 n=801><p>Skalmar-kelda, near Rauðamelr (W.), II. 5. 4.

<p>Skalmar-nes, Barðastr&aolig;nd, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 5. 2: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Skáney, Northern Reykjardalr (S.), I. 6. 6; 10. 2.

<p>Skáney, = Skaane, in the S. of Sweden, Hv. 2. 9.

<p>Skarð (Eastern), Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 4: Cr. 8. 3.

<p>Skarð (Western or Outer), Land, between Þiórs&aoacute; and Rang&aoacute; (S.), Pol. 1. 5; 2. 4; 10. 1: Od. 6. 4.

<p>Skarð, Meðall&aolig;nd (E.), IV. 16. 4.

<p>Skarð, Skarðsstr&aolig;nd, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 6.

<p>Skarð (= Svignaskarð), W. of Gliúfr&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 5.

<p>Skarðz-brecka, Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 3.

<p>Skarfa-nes, between Þiórs&aoacute; and Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), III. 11. 2 (?): V. 6. 2.

<p>Skeggja-staðer, Mosfellssveit, E. of Reykjavík (S.), I. 4. 3.

<p>Skeggja-staðer, on Sandvík (E.), IV. 1. 3.

<p>Skeggja-staðer, E. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (E.), IV. 3. 3.

<p>Skeið, between Hvít&aoacute; and Þiórs&aoacute;, NE. of Flóe (S), V. 12. 3: Gen. A. 17.

<p>Skeiðs-breckor, above Vatzhorn, Hauka&shy;dalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Skelja-brecka, S. of Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 8. 3.

<p>Skialda-biarnar-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 1.

<p>Skiald-ey, off D&aolig;gorðarnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 9. 3.

<p>Skialfanda-fliót, the river which runs into Skialfande (N.), Cr. 4. 3.

<p>Skialfanda-fliótz-óss, the mouth of prec. (N.), III. 16. 1; 17. 1.

<p>Skialfande, E. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), I. 2. 2: Mant. 4.

<p>Skiálgs-dals-&aoacute;, runs from the W. into Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 14. 10; 15. 6&ndash;7.

<p>Skíða-dalr, runs from the S. into Svarfaðardalr (N.), III. 12. 7.

<p>Skinna-staðer, S. of &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), Cr. 4. 3.

<p>Skioldolfs-nes, Breiðadalr (E.), IV. 11. 5.

<p>Skioldolfs-staðer, W. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (E.), IV. 3. 6.

<p>Skipa-hylr, Hitar&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 1.

<p>Skóga-hverfe, Síða (E.), IV. 7. 2: Gen. A. 23: Cr. 4. 3.

<pb id=pb802 n=802><p>Skógar (Eastern), under Eyjafi&aolig;ll (S.), I. 7. 8: IV. 9. 4: V. 2. 2: Cr. 1. 2.

<p>Skógar, Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 5.

<p>Skógar-nes, Miklaholtshreppr, Mýrar (W.), Gen. B. 10.

<p>Skógar-str&aolig;nd, S. of Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 11. 8.

<p>Sk&aoacute;l, between Skaft&aoacute; and Drífande, Síða (E.), IV. 18. 1.

<p>Skora-dalr, <hi lang=en-UK>see</hi> Scora-dalr.

<p>Skora-vik, Fellzstr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 16. 1.

<p>Sk&aolig;rðo-vík (al. Skarða), E. of Lax&aoacute;, Skialfande (N.), III. 18. 2.

<p>Skorra-holt, (?) in  Skorradalr (S.), II. 20. 3.

<p>Skoto-fi&aolig;rðr, Ísati&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 25. 2; 26. 1.

<p>Skottland, = Scotland, II. 9. 3; 14. 1&ndash;4; 20. 1.

<p>Skratta-fell, Reykjadalr (N.), III. 18. 3.

<p>Skraumo-hlaups-&aoacute;, runs from the S. into Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 13. 1; 14. 8; 15. 1: Th. 6.

<p>Skríðins-enne, E. of Kollafi&aolig;rðr, Húnaflóe (W.), II. 29. 4; 30. 4.

<p>Skriðo-dalr, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 5. 2&ndash;3; 6. 2.

<p>Skrúðr (al. Skrúðey), SE. of Reyðarfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 10. 6.

<p>Skúfs-l&oeacute;kr, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 1.

<p>Skugga-bi&aolig;rg, Náttfaravík (N.), I. 2. 1: III. 16. 1.

<p>Skúla-staðer, Alftanes (S.), V. 16. 12.

<p>Skutils-fi&aolig;rðr, Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 24. 6&ndash;7.

<p>Skutr (?), II. 20. 2.

<p>Sleggjo-beins-&aoacute;, Breiðavík, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 12.

<p>Sleggjo-l&oeacute;kr, S. of Kiarr&aoacute;, opposite Ornolfsdalr (W.), II. 2. 4; 3. 3.

<p>Sleito-biarnar-staðer, Saurb&oeacute;r, <corr sic="Breiðafi&aolig;rdr">Breiðafi&aolig;rðr</corr> (W.), II. 18. 2.

<p>Slétta, W. of I&aolig;kulfirðer (W.), II. 27. 1.

<p>Slétta, = Melrakka-slétta (N.), III. 22. 1. 3.

<p>Slétta-hlíð, NE. of H&aolig;rðastr&aolig;nd, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 4; 12. 7.

<p>Slétta-nes, between Dýrafi&aolig;rðr and Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 6.

<p>Sletto-biarnar-staðer, S. of Deilðar&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 9. 2.

<p>Smiðs-staðer, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 13.

<p>Smior-sund, between Horðaland and Rogaland, Norway, I. 2. 3.

<p>Sniallz-h&aolig;fðe (al. Snjall-steins-h.), on Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 7. 2.

<p>Snorra-staðir, near Scálaholt (S.), Pol. 7. 1.

<pb id=pb803 n=803><p>Snæ-fell, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

<p>Snæ-fellz-i&aolig;kull, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 12. 3.

<p>Snæ-fellz-nes, S. of Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), I. 1; 2. 3: II. 20. 5: III. 22. 6: Th. 4.

<p>Snæ-fi&aolig;ll, N. of Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 26. 6: III. 1. 2.

<p>Snæ-land, = Iceland, I. 2. 2.

<p>S&oelig;ckolfs-dalr, SE. of Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 6.

<p>Sogn, in the W. of Norway, I. 4. 1: II. 25. 1; 26. 6: III. 6. 1; 12. 8; 20. 2: IV. 15. 1: V. 7. 5; 11. 1; 12. 1: Gen. A. 13; 14; 25; 35: Th. 1: Mant. 5.

<p>Sókna-dalr, Haðaland, Norway, III. 15. 2: Gen. A. 33.

<p>Sólar-fiall, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 2.

<p>Sóle, SE. of Hafrsfi&aolig;rðr, Norway, Gen. B. 15; 16.

<p>Sól-heimar, E. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (S.), IV. 9. 3&ndash;4: Gen. B. 13 (?).

<p>Sól-heima-sandr, E. of I&aolig;kuls&aoacute; (S.), IV. 1 <hi>n.</hi>; 9. 3; 19. 1.

<p>Solmundar-h&aolig;fðe, Mýrar (W.), II. 1. 1.

<p>Sólundir, off the mouth of Sognefjord, Norway, I. 8. 1.

<p>Solva-dalr, E. of Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 14. 2.

<p>Solva-dalr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Solva-hamarr, on Breiðavík, S. of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 12.

<p>Solve, E. of Agðanes, Norway, V. 9. 7.

<p>Sóta-fell, W. of Vestrhóp (N.), III. 3. 2.

<p>Sóta-nes, Ránríke, Norway, II. 4. 3.

<p>Spá-kono-fell, Skagastr&aolig;nd (N.), Gen. B. 13.

<p>Stað, Cape Stadt, Norway, I. 1: Th. 2.

<p>Stacks-&aoacute;, runs into Tungofliót (S.), V. 13. 6; 14. 3.

<p>Staðar-backe (&lsquo;Stead-bank&rsquo;), Miðfi&aolig;rðr (N.), p. 610.

<p>Staðar-hóll, Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

<p>Stafa-fell, Lón (E.), Cr. 4. 3 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Stafa-holt, between Norðr&aoacute; and Þver&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 3. 7; 7. 1: Od. 4. 1.

<p>Stafa-holtz-tunga, <hi>ibid.</hi>, II. 3. 7.

<p>Stafa-nes-vágr, Fialer, Norway, V. II. 2.

<p>Stafangr, = Stavanger, Norway, I. 7. 8, 11: Þorl. 8. 2.

<p>Stafn-gríms-staðer, old name of Sigmun&shy;dar-staðer (S.), I. 10. 6.

<p>Staf&aoacute;, Sléttahlíð, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 4.

<pb id=pb804 n=804><p>Staf-&aoacute;, = Stafs&aoacute; (W.), Th. 4. 3; 6. 1.

<p>Stafs-hóll, Deilðardalr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 5; 12. 2.

<p>Stafs-&aoacute;, between Þórsnes and Hraunsfi&aolig;rðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 9. 2; 10. 2. (<hi lang=en-UK>See also</hi> Staf-&aoacute;.)

<p>Stál-fiara, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

<p>Stangar-holt, E. of Lang&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 7.

<p>Stape, Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 2, 6.

<p>Staurr, = the Staer of Assynt, Sutherland, Scotland, p. 613.

<p>Steig, Ongull, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 16. 5.

<p>Steinar, between Þver&aoacute; and Hvít&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 3. 9.

<p>Steinfinnz-staðer, above Kross&aoacute;, E. of Markarfliót (S.), V. 3. 6.

<p>Steingríms-fi&aolig;rðr, Húnaflóe (W.), II. 5. 1; 17. 6; 20. 7; 29. 3: III. 10. 2: Gen. B. 11.

<p>Steinolfs-dalr, Króksfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 1, 5.

<p>Steinolfs-hialle, in Fagradalr (W.), II. 18. 1.

<p>Steinr&oelig;ðar-staðer, Hrafnkelsdalr (E.), IV. 6. 3.

<p>Steinr&oelig;ðar-staðer, near Olfusvatn (S.), V. 16. 2.

<p>Steins-holt, Gnúpverjahreppr (S.), V. 13. 2.

<p>Steins-holt, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 2.

<p>Steins-l&oeacute;kr, between Rauðal&oeacute;kr and Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 9&ndash;10.

<p>Steins-staðer, Tunga, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 3.

<p>Steins-staðer, Vatzdalr (N.), Hu. 1. 11.

<p>Steins-vað, on Gríms&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), Od. 4. 3.

<p>Stífla, S. of Fliót, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 1, 3.

<p>Stíganda-hróf, beside Þingeyrar, Húna&shy;vatn (N.), III. 5. 9.

<p>Stigi (= Stigagnúpr), NE. of Skálavík, Vestfirðer (W.), II. 24. 3.

<p>Stim, between Raumsdalr and Norðm&oeacute;rr, Norway, III. 15. 2.

<p>Stiorno-steinar, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

<p>Stocka-hlaðer, W. of Eyjafiarðar&aoacute; (N.), III. 16. 1.

<p>Stocks-eyrr, E. of Olfus&aoacute;, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

<p>St&aolig;ðvar-fi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer, (E.), IV. 11. 1.

<p>St&aolig;ng, Þiórsárdalr (S.), V. 13. 3.

<p>Stórolfs-v&aolig;llr, between Þver&aoacute; and Eastern Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4 <hi>n.</hi>; 7. 4.

<p>Stota-l&oeacute;kr, runs into Eastern Rang&aoacute;, <pb id=pb805 n=805>SW. of Reyðarvatn (S.), V. 7. 7: Gen. A. 12.

<p>Strandar-heiðr, between Barðastr&aolig;nd and Rauðasandr (W.), II. 26. 4.

<p>Strander, = Hornstrander (W.), II. 17. 6; 28. 4: Od. 5. 1.

<p>Strander (2), Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 7.

<p>Straum-fiarðar-&aoacute;, Miklaholt, W. of Mýrar (W.), II. 5. 6, 8.

<p>Straum(s)-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 12: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 13.

<p>Straum-nes, Hornstrander (W.), II. 17. 6; 27. 2; 28. 1.

<p>Streite, Breiðdalr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 11. 5.

<p>Strind, Þrándheimr, Norway, IV. 2. 1.

<p>Str&aolig;nd (= Látrastr&aolig;nd), E. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 16. 3.

<p>Str&aolig;nd (= Upsastr&aolig;nd), W. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 7.

<p>Strúgs-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

<p>Sturlo-staðer, under Tungofell (W.), II. 1. 1.

<p>Suðr-ey, off Skógarstr&aolig;nd, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Suðr-eyjar, the Hebrides, I. 2. 1; 4. 5; 5. 1; 6. 1: II. 5. 9; 9. 1; 14. 1: III. 13. 2&ndash;3; 15. 1; 17. 3: IV. 4. 2; 13. 3; 14. 1; 16. 1: V. 15. 1: Th. 1. 2&ndash;3; 5. 1; 6. 1.

<p>Suðr-i&aolig;klar, S. from Hvít&aoacute; (S.), I. 11. 1.

<p>Suðr-land, Sutherland, Scotland, II. 14. 1.

<p>Suðr-l&aolig;nd, the lands S. of the Baltic, Cr. 1. 1.

<p>Súganda-fi&aolig;rðr, Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 24. 3, 6.

<p>Súlo-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 1.

<p>Sumarliða-b&oeacute;r, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 4. 6.

<p>Sunn-horða-land, Norway, Th. 2. 3.

<p>Sunnlendinga-fiórðungr, the Southern Quarter of Iceland (S.), V. 1; 17. 2: Cr. 4. 3; 10. 6: Hv. 2. 10.

<p>Sunn-m&oeacute;rr, between Firðer and Raums&shy;dalr, Norway, II. 23. 1: IV. 16. 3.

<p>Sunno-dalr, SW. of Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 2. 2.

<p>Súrna-dalr, Norðm&oeacute;rr, Norway, III. 15. 2.

<p>Surtz-hellir, <hi>see</hi> Hellirenn Surtz.

<p>Svaða-staðer, S. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), p. 413.

<p>Svalbarð, on the E. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.). III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4.

<p>Svalbarðe, Hafsbotn, I. 1.

<p>Svans-hóll, Biarnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 29. 2.

<p>Svarfaðar-dalr, runs from the SW. into Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 2: IV. 1. 4: p. 320. 7.

<pb id=pb806 n=806><p>Svart-ár-dalr, on the E. side of the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 4.

<p>Svart-ár-dalr, Héraðsv&aolig;tn, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 7. 7.

<p>Svartz-sker, off Mýrar (W.), II. 20. 5.

<p>Svefn-eyjar, E. of Flatey, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 1.

<p>Sveinungs-eyrr, Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 26. 4.

<p>Sveinungs-vík, SE. of Melracka-slétta (N.), III. 22. 3, 5.

<p>Svertings-staðer, W. of Markarfliót (S.), V. 6. 1.

<p>Svez-staðer, Hringaríke, Norway, Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Svía-ríke, = Sweden, I. 1; 2. 1: III. 9. 1; 16. 1.

<p>Sviðin-horna-dalr, = Hamarsdalr, above Hamarsfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 11. 7.

<p>Svína-dalr, S. of Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 4; 18. 1.

<p>Svína-dalr, SE. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 15.

<p>Svína-fell, Oræfe (E.), Gen. A. 25; B. 15: Nj. pp. 364, 367: Od. 1. 2.

<p>Svína-nes, W. from Skálanes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 6.

<p>Svína-vatn, Grímsnes (S.), V. 15. 1.

<p>Svína-vatn, near Hraunsfi&aolig;rðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 3.

<p>Svína-vatn, Svínadalr (N.), III. 5. 11, 15.

<p>Svín-ey, off D&aolig;gorðarnes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 12. 2; 16. 1.

<p>Svín-hage, on Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 7. 6.

<p>Svíþióð, = Sweden, III. 9. 1 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Svolðr, an island off Vindland, beside Rugen, Cr. 8. 12.

<p>Syðre-dalr, = Reykjardalr enn Syðre (S.), I. 11. 2.

<p>Sygna-fylke, = Sogn, Norway, V. II. 2: Mant. 5. 2.

<p>Sygna-kleif, N. of Fliót, W. of Horn (W.), II. 25. 1.

<p>Syllingar, = the Scilly Isles, Cr. 3. 3.

<p>Sýr-l&oeacute;kjar-óss (&lsquo;Sour-beck mouth&rsquo;) Skaptafellsþing (E.), p. 417.

<p>Sælings-dalr, -dals-&aoacute;, -dals-tunga, N. of Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), Gen. A. 36; B. 3.

<p>Sæmundar-hlíð, S. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 7. 1: Gen. A. 32.

<p>Sæmundar-l&oeacute;kr, W. of Sæmundarhlíð (N.), III. 7. 1.

<p>Sætr, H&aolig;rðaland, Norway, II. 24. 3.



<div3 id=ixnT>
<head>T</head>


<p>Talcna-fi&aolig;rðr, N. of Patreksfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 21. 5.

<pb id=pb807 n=807><p>Teigar-&aoacute;, runs from the W. into I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, S. of Hofsteigr (E.), IV. 3. 5.

<p>Thile, = Thule or Iceland, Prol., p. 13.

<p>Tialda-nes, N. of Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 1.

<p>Tialda-nes, Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), Gen. B. 9.

<p>Tialda-staðer, Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 5.

<p>Tialda-v&aolig;llr, W. of H&aolig;fðabrecka (E.), IV. 17. 2.

<p>Tinno-dals-&aoacute;, runs from the N. into Breiðdals&aoacute; (E.), IV. 11. 4.

<p>Tinz-dalr, Þelam&aolig;rk, Norway, V. 8. 1.

<p>Tior-nes, NE. of Skialfande (N.), III. 20. 1, 3.

<p>T&aolig;ðor, Sudrey, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Tofta-fell, Breiðársandr (E.), IV. 15. 2.

<p>Tofta-v&aolig;llr, near Sunnudalr, SW. of Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 3. 1.

<p>Torfa-staðer, Vestradalr, Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 2. 3.

<p>Torf-hvala-staðer, Langavatzdalr (W.), II. 4. 3.

<p>Torf-nes, Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 1.

<p>Torgar, = Torghatten, Hálogaland, Norway, V. 4. 1.

<p>Traðar-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2; 12. 2.

<p>Trekt, (?) Utrecht, Hv. 5. 1.

<p>Tré-kyllis-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 5.

<p>Trostans-fi&aolig;rðr, Arnarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 22. 5.

<p>Trolla-hals, between Kolgrafafi&aolig;rðr and Staðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

<p>Trolla-skógr, near Reyðarvatn (S.), V. 7. 7: Gen. A. 12.

<p>Trolla-tunga, Steingrímsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 29. 3: Gen. B. 11.

<p>Tunga en eystre, between Tungofliót and Hvít&aoacute; (S.), V. 14. 6.

<p>Tunga en vestre, between Tungofliót and Bruar&aoacute; (S.), V. 13. 6.

<p>Tunga (= Br&oeacute;ðratunga), Biskupstungor (S.), V. 14. 6.

<p>Tunga, between Hvít&aoacute; and Reykjadals&aoacute; (S.), I. 10. 1.

<p>Tunga, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 9.

<p>Tunga, between Svart&aoacute; and I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 3.

<p>Tunga, = S&oeacute;lingdalstunga (W.), Gen. B. 3; 13.

<p>Tunga (= Þórorms-túnga), Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 13.

<p>Tungan lítla, between Hvít&aoacute; and Geit&aoacute; (W.), II. 1. 1&ndash;2.

<pb id=pb808 n=808><p>Tún-garðr, Flekkudalr, N. of Hvammsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), H. 16. 1.

<p>Tungo-fell, Geitl&aolig;nd (W.), II. 1. 1.

<p>Tungo-fell, Syðredalr (S.), I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3.

<p>Tungo-heiðr, E. of Skialfande (N.), III. 18. 2.

<p>Tungo-l&aolig;nd (= Skaftártunga), between Skaft&aoacute; and Holms&aoacute; (E.), IV. 17. 5.

<p>Tungo-l&aolig;nd (= Hróarstunga), between Lagarfliót and I&aolig;kuls&aoacute;, IV. 3. 7.

<p>Tungo-&aoacute;, Stífla, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 1&ndash;2.

<p>Tungo-&aoacute;, S. of Tiornes (N.), III. 20. 1.



<div3 id=ixnU>
<head>U</head>


<p>Úbygð, Greenland, I. 1.

<p>Úfeigs-staðer, Gnúpverjahreppr (S.), V. 13. 2.

<p>Úf&oeacute;ra, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Ú-f&oeacute;ra, S. of Onundarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 23. 3.

<p>Ufser, W. of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 7.

<p>Ulaztir, = Ulster, Ireland, Hv. 2. 20.

<p>Ulfars-&aoacute;, Kiós (S.), I. 4. 3.

<p>Ulfars-fell, on the W. side of Alftafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 11. 2: Th. 7. 8.

<p>Ulfs-daler, NE. of Fliót, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 4&ndash;5, 7.

<p>Ulfs-staðer, Northern Reykjardalr (S.), I. 10. 5.

<p>Una-dals-&aoacute;, runs from the E. into Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 11. 1.

<p>Unaðs-dalr (al. Una-dalr), H&aolig;fðastr&aolig;nd (N.), III. 5. 12.

<p>Unaðs-dalr, N. of Ísafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 25. 2; 26. 5.

<p>Una-l&oeacute;kr, to the S. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 7. 1.

<p>Una-óss, at the E. corner of Héraðsflóe (E.), IV. 7. 1.

<p>Undorn-fell (cod. Undunfell), Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 13.

<p>Uppl&aolig;nd, the Uplands in the E. of Norway, III. 5. 1: V. 2. 1; 12. 1: Gen. B. 16: Pol. 3. 2.

<p>Uppsaler, = Upsala, Sweden, III. 9. 1: Lib. 7. 9; Epil.: p. 309. 1.

<p>Urðar-vatn, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

<p>Urðer, Svarfaðardalr (N.), III. 12. 8.

<p>Urt-hvalar-fi&aolig;rðr<corr>,</corr> E. of Ondorðeyrr, Snæfellznes (W.), Th. 7. 2.

<p>Usvifrs-l&oeacute;kr, under Esjoberg (S.), I. 6. 4.



<div3 id=ixnV>
<head>V</head>


<p>Vaðill, Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), I. 7. 6: II. 24. 1; 26. 4.

<p>Vágar, near Búlandzh&aolig;fðe, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 6.

<pb id=pb809 n=809><p>Vágr, to the S. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), II. 12. 7: V. 16. 7, 11.

<p>Valdres, in the centre of Norway, IV. 18. 8.

<p>Valla-nes, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 3.

<p>Valþiófs-staðer, Haukadalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Valþiófs-staðr, Fliótsdalr (E.), Gen. A. 26.

<p>Vá-múle, Óláfsfi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 8.

<p>Vánar-skarð, under Túngnafellsj&aolig;kull, in the centre of Iceland (N.), III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 5.

<p>Vápna-fiarðar-&aoacute;, runs from the SW. into Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 2. 2.

<p>Vápna-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd, the SE. shore of Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 3. 2.

<p>Vápna-fi&aolig;rðr, Austfirðer (E.), II. 3. 7: IV. 2. 1&ndash;2; 3. 1: Gen. A. 28: Hv. 2. 1.

<p>Varð-gi&aoacute;, on the E. side of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 15. 11&ndash;12.

<p>Varm-&aoacute;, Olfus (S.), V. 16. 4&ndash;5.

<p>Varma-dalr, on Hróarst&oeacute;kr, Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 7.

<p>Varma-l&oeacute;kr, between Geirs&aoacute; and Grims&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 9. 4: Gen. A. 18.

<p>Vatn, Haukadalr (W.), II. 15. 8.

<p>Vatna-hverfe, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Vatnars-haugr, S. of Bergen, Norway, Mant. 5. 3.

<p>Vatn-lausa, SW. from Reykjavík (S.), I. 6. 5; 10. 4.

<p>Vatz-dalr, Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 3, 12; 11. 3, 5: Mant. 6. 2: Cr. 1. 1; 2. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Vatz-dals-&aoacute;, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 12.

<p>Vatz-fell, W. of Fliótshlíð (S.), V. 4. 2.

<p>Vatz-fi&aolig;rðr, E. of Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), I. 2. 3: II. 15. 9b; 21. 1.

<p>Vatz-fi&aolig;rðr, between Mióvef. and Ísaf. (W.), II.26. 2: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 2: Mant. 1. 7: Cr. 10. 10.

<p>Vatz-hals, S. of Þórsnes (W.), Th. 8. 3.

<p>Vatz-hlíð, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 3.

<p>Vatz-horn, Haukadalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

<p>Vatz-l&aolig;nd, near Olfusvatn (S.), V. 16. 1.

<p>Vatz-nes, Bolungarvík (W.), II. 24. 5.

<p>Vatz-nes, Húnaflóe (N.), III. 3. 1.

<p>Vatz-&aoacute;, &OElig;xnadalr (N.), III. 14. 17.

<p>Vatz-skarð, SW. of Sæmundarhlíð (N.), III. 5. 15; 6. 3; 7. 4.

<p>Vegger (= Síðumulaveggir), Hvítársíða (W.), II. 3. 3.

<pb id=pb810 n=810><p>Veiðe-lausa, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 5.

<p>Vékels-haugar, Ki&aolig;lr, Central Iceland, III. 7. 8; 15. 4 (enn syðre).

<p>Véli-gerðe (al. Vélu-, Vælu-), Flóe (S.), V. 7. 1&ndash;2; 12. 2.

<p>Vellan-catla, E. of Olfusvatn (S.), Lib. 7. 4: Cr. 8. 3.

<p>Veller, Rangárveller (S.), V. 9. 4(? outer), 5: Od. 6. 2.

<p>Veller (&lsquo;Wallds&rsquo;), Svarfaðardalr (N.), pp. 606, 608.

<p>Veller (&lsquo;Wallds&rsquo;), = Þingveller (S.), p. 598.

<p>Ver (= Alftaver), E. of Kúðafliót (S.), Þorl. 6. 3&ndash;4; 10. 3: Pol. 2. 3.

<p>Vera-dalr, Þrándheimr, Norway, IV. 4. 1: Gen. A. 19.

<p>Verma-land, Sweden, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5.

<p>Vestars-nes (?), II. 17. 6.

<p>Vest-dals-&aoacute;, falls into Seyðisfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 10. 1.

<p>Vestfirðínga-fiórðungr, the Western Quarter of Iceland, II. 1; 30. 5: V. 17. 4: Th. 10. 4 <hi>n.</hi>: Cr. 2. 2; 8. 7; 10. 6: Hv. 2. 10: Pol. 14. 1: Od. 5. 1.

<p>Vest-firðer, the Western Friths of Iceland, Th. 10. 4: Hv. 4. 10.

<p>Vest-fold, in the SE. of Norway, III. 9. 4.

<p>Vestmanna-eyjar, S. of Iceland, I. 3. 7: V. 3. 7: Lib. 7. 1: Cr. 8. 2: Hv. 4. 7: Pol. 10. 1.

<p>Vestmars-vatn, W. of Múle, Reykjadalr (N.), III. 18. 3; 19. 1.

<p>Vestra-dals-&aoacute;, runs from the SW. into Vápnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 2. 1&ndash;3.

<p>Vestre-bygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

<p>Vestre-dalr, Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

<p>Vestr-hóp, S. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 3. 1&ndash;2: Mant. 1. 7: Io. 7. 1 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Vestr-l&aolig;nd, the western lands (Great Britain and Ireland), V. 7. 3 <hi>n.</hi>: p. 326. 7.

<p>Vetleifs-holt, between Outer Rang&aoacute; and Rauðal&oeacute;kr (S.), V. 2. 8.

<p>Við-borð, at the head of Hornafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 14. 6, 9.

<p>Víðe-dalr, S. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 4. 1; 5. 2: Gen. B. 2; 4; 5: Cr<corr>.</corr> 2. 1.

<p>Víðe-l&oelig;kr, Þverárhlíð, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 6.

<p>Víðe-mýrr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), II. 4. 5; 20. 8: Io. 12. 2.

<p>Víðe-skógr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

<p>Við-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Barðznes (E.), IV. 10. 4.

<pb id=pb811 n=811><p>Við-fi&aolig;rðr, SE. of Finnafi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 1. 2.

<p>Við-vík, E. of Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 9. 3.

<p>Vífils-fell, E. of Hafnarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), I. 3. 8.

<p>Vífils-staðer (al. -toftir), near Vífilsfell (S.), I. 3. 8.

<p>Vífils-toftir, (?) Fellsskógar (W.), II. 16. 2.

<p>Viggja, Þrándheimr, Norway, V. 3. 3.

<p>Vigra-fi&aolig;rðr, E. of Þórsnes, running into Alfta-fi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 8. 1; 11. 6: Th. 4. 4.

<p>Vík (al. Eyvík), Grímsnes (S.), Cr. 4. 4.

<p>Vík, (?) = Trékyllisvík (W.), II. 28. 5.

<p>Vík or Víken, Norway, III. 13. 2: V. 11. 2: Th. 2. 1: Lib. 9. 1: Hv. 1. 7: Pol. 3. 2.

<p>Víken gamla, between Hólmkels&aoacute; and Búlandzh&aolig;fðe, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 5.

<p>Víkings-l&oeacute;kr, on Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 7. 5; 8. 4.

<p>Víkr, beside Patrecsfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 21. 4.

<p>Vikrar-skeið (al. Vikars-), beside Olfus&aoacute; (S.), II. 14. 6.

<p>Villinga-dalr, Eyjafiarðardalr (N.), III. 15. 8.

<p>Vind-land, Wendland, the S. side of the Baltic, Cr. 3. 2; 8. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

<p>Vin-heiðr (? Brunanburh), England, II. 4. 1.

<p>Vín-land et góða, on the East Coast of America, II. 19. 2: III. 11. 2: Lib. 6. 2: Cr. 8. 1.

<p>Vinverja-dalr, near the source of the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 8; 8. 9: Io. 7. <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Vitaz-giafe, beside Þver&aoacute; (N.), III. 21. 1.

<p>Vívils-dalr, runs from SE. into Horða&shy;dalr, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 4.

<p>V&aolig;llr, E. of Eastern Rang&aoacute; (S.), V. 4. 7 <hi>n.</hi>: Gen. A. 3.

<p>V&aolig;rðo-fell, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 3.

<p>Vors, E. of Bergen, Norway, II. 5. 6: III. 14. 4: IV. 9. 2; 10. 5; 12. 1: V. 10. 5; 14. 5: Lib. 7. 1.

<p>Vorsa-b&oeacute;r, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 5.

<p>Vælugerðe, <hi>see</hi> Véli-gerðe.



<div3 id=ixnY>
<head>Y</head>


<p>Ýrar-fell, NW. of Goðdaler (N.), III. 7. 7.

<p>Yrjar, at the mouth of Trondhjemsfjord, Norway, IV. 3. 1.

<pb id=pb812 n=812>

<p>Ytra-Skarð, between Þiórs&aoacute; and Outer Rang&aoacute; (S.), Od. 2. 2; 6. 4.

<p>Yxney, <hi>see</hi> &OElig;xney.



<div3 id=ixnTh>
<head>Þ</head>


<p>Þangbranz-hróf, Southern Alftafi&aolig;rðr (N.), Cr. 4. 2.

<p>Þangbranz-hróf, S. of Hitar&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 1.

<p>Þangbranz-l&oeacute;kr, S. of &OElig;xarfi&aolig;rðr (N.), Cr. 4. 3 <hi>n.</hi>

<p>Þangbranz-poll, Mývatn (N.), Cr. 4. 3.

<p>Þegjanda-dalr, S. of Grenjaðarstaðer, Laxárdalr (N.), III. 19. 5.

<p>Þelam&aolig;rk, Central Norway, I. 3. 1: V. 8. 1.

<p>Þerno-nes, S. of Reyðarfi&aolig;rðr (E.), IV. 10. 6.

<p>Þing-eyrar, S. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 9: Io. 12. 5; 13. 1.

<p>Þingeyrar-þing, S. of Dýrafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 25. 2.

<p>Þingeyra-sveit, S. of Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 5. 6.

<p>Þing-nes, S. of Hvít&aoacute; Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (S.), II. 26. 2, 4: Lib. 5. 1.

<p>Þing-v&aolig;llr, the site of the Alþing, N. of Olfusvatn (S.), V. 14. 2; 16. 2&ndash;3: Mant. 1. 1: Lib. 7. 4 <hi>n.</hi>: pp. 351, 353, 356: Cr. 8: Hv. 2. 17.

<p>Þistils-fi&aolig;rðr, W. of Langanes (NE.), II. 6. 1: III. 22. 6.

<p>Þióðreks-borg, on Kollafiarðar-heiðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

<p>Þiórs-&aoacute;, the great river which runs SW. from the centre of Iceland (S.), V. 4. 2; 5. 2; 6. 2; 7. 2; 9. 3; 10. 10&ndash;11; 12. 1, 3, 5: Pol. 10.

<p>Þiórs-ár-dalr, W. of Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), III. 22. 3&ndash;4: V. 9. 6; 13. 3: Lib. 7. 1: Cr. 6. 2.

<p>Þiórs-ár-holt, between Outer Rang&aoacute; and Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 9. 6.

<p>Þiórs-ár-óss, the mouth of Þiórs&aoacute; (S.), V. 10. 6.

<p>Þórbeines-staðer, S. of Þórsnes (W.), Th. 8. 3.

<p>Þórbrannz-staðer, Norðrárdalr, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

<p>Þórdísar-holt, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 2.

<p>Þóres-bi&aolig;rg, Hnappadalssýsla (W.), II. 5. 4.

<p>Þóres-hólar, Brynjodalr, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 7.

<p>Þóres-staðer, Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 5.

<p>Þórfinnz-staðer, Norðrárdalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 8.

<pb id=pb813 n=813><p>Þórgantz-staðer, Hvítársíða (W.), II. 2. 3.

<p>Þórgeirs-fi&aolig;rðr, between Eyjafi&aolig;rðr and Skialfande (N.), III. 16. 3&ndash;4.

<p>Þórgeirs-haugr, Pappýle, IV. 14. 8.

<p>Þórgerðar-fell, near Grenjaðarstaðer, Laxárdalr (N.), III. 19. 5.

<p>Þórgils-staðer, Diúpafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 2.

<p>Þórmóðs-eyrr, on the W. side of Siglofi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 12. 7.

<p>Þórmóðs-sker, SW. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 20. 5.

<p>Þóroddz-staðer, E. of Hrútafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 1. 2.

<p>Þórolfs-fell, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 3. 5.

<p>Þórorms-tunga, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 10.

<p>Þóro-tofter, Langaholt, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9.

<p>Þórs-&aoacute;, runs into Alftafi&aolig;rðr E. of Þórsnes (W.), II. 10. 2; 11. 1: Th. 4. 3; 7. 1.

<p>Þórs-ár-dalr, Alftafi&aolig;rðr (W.), Th. 8. 2.

<p>Þorska-fiarðar-str&aolig;nd, on Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 20. 1.

<p>Þorska-fiarðar-þing, at the head of Þorskafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 3: III. 10. 2.

<p>Þorska-fi&aolig;rðr, N. of Reykjanes, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 17. 4&ndash;5; 19. 1.

<p>Þórs-m&aolig;rk, between Markarfliót and Kross&aoacute; (S.), V. 3. 6: Od. 6.

<p>Þórs-nes, S. of Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 10. 1&ndash;2: Th. 4; 10.

<p>Þórs-ness-þing, on Þórsnes (W.), II. 7. 6; 11. 6; 12. 2: Th. 9: p. 328. 13.

<p>Þórunnar-ey, at the head of Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 3.

<p>Þórunnar-hálsar, (?) Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 3.

<p>Þórunnar-holt, (?) Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 6.

<p>Þórunnar-hylr, on Þver&aoacute;, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 3. 6.

<p>Þórunnar-tofter, Fellzstr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 16. 2.

<p>Þórvallz-dalr, S. of Hrísey, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 9, 13.

<p>Þórvallz-dals-&aoacute;, <hi>ibid.</hi>, III. 14. 12.

<p>Þórvarðz-staðer, Hvítársíða (W.), I. 10. 2: II. 2. 2: III. 11. 2.

<p>Þrasa-staðer, above Sólheimasandr (S.), V. 2. 2.

<pb id=pb814 n=814><p>Þríhyrningr, W. of Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 6. 3; 7. 8: Gen. A. 9.

<p>Þróndar-holt, Flókadalr (S.), I. 9. 5.

<p>Þróndar-holt, between Þiórs&aoacute; and Lax&aoacute; (S.), III. 15. 4: V. 12. 5.

<p>Þrónd-heimr, Norway, I. 7. 7: IV. 2. 1; 11. 1: V. 3. 1: Th. 2. 1: Cr. 5. 6; 6. 2: Hv. 1. 12; 5. 13: Þorl. 8. 2: Pol. 7. 3: Io. 4. 5.

<p>Þruma, Agðer, Norway, V. 8. 2.

<p>Þræla-vík, near Lóndrangar, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

<p>Þúfa, on Hiallanes (W.), II. 23. 1.

<p>Þúfo-bi&aolig;rg, at the SW. corner of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

<p>Þulu-nes, Vors, Norway, IV. 9. 2.

<p>Þurs-staðer, SW. of Borg, Borgarfi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 4. 7.

<p>Þvátt-&aoacute;, S. of Southern Alftafi&aolig;rðr (E.), Lib. 7. 1: Cr. 4. 2 B&ast;: Od. 1. 3.

<p>Þver-ár-dalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 1.

<p>Þver-ár-hlíð, between Þver&aoacute; and Norðr&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 2. 1; 3. 1.

<p>Þver-fell, Saurb&oeacute;r, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

<p>Þver-firðer, the Friths on Barðastr&aolig;nd (W.), II. 20. 1.

<p>Þver-&aoacute;, runs into Hvít&aoacute;, Mýrar (W.), II. 2. 5; 3. 1, 6&ndash;7.

<p>Þver-&aoacute;, Vatznes, Húnafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 3. 1.

<p>Þver-&aoacute;, Bl&aolig;ndohlíð, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 8. 10&ndash;11.

<p>Þver-&aoacute; en efre, Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 4: Gen. B. 15: Thorl. 15. 1.

<p>Þver-&aoacute; (en ytre), Eyjafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 14. 4; 15. 11.

<p>Þver-&aoacute;, &OElig;xnadalr (N.), III. 14. 19.

<p>Þver-&aoacute;, joins Markarfliót and the two Rángár (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 3.

<p>Þver-&aoacute;, Gnúpverjahreppr (S.), V. 13. 2.

<p>Þver-&aoacute;, (?) = Túng&aoacute;, S. of Olfusvatn (S.), V. 16. 1, 4.

<p>Þyckva-b&oeacute;r, W. of Kuðafliót (E.), IV. 15. 5: Hv. 5. 11: Þorl. 6. 1.

<p>Þyckva-skógr, Haukadalr, Breiðafi&aolig;rðr (W.), II. 15. 10.



<div3 id=ixnAe>
<head>Æ</head>


<p>Ægis-dyrr, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), V. 3. 7.

<p>Ægis-síða, N. of Hólar in Vestrhóp, III. 3. 1.

<p>Ævars-skarð, Skagafi&aolig;rðr (N.), III. 6. 1.




<pb id=pb815 n=815>
<div1 id=imprint2 type=Imprint>

<p rend="align(center) font-size(smaller)">Oxford: Printed at the Clarendon Press, by <hi rend=sc>Horace Hart</hi>, M.A.


</div1>

<divGen type=Colophon>

</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>

<!--

CHECKLIST (X = done; / = not applicable)

Initial cleanup

[ ] Check all pb-tags, and join lines
[ ] Move all footnotes in-line
[ ] Tag headers
[X] Fix all [** Proofer comments]
[ ] Start all paragraphs with the p-tag
[ ] Change b, sc, g tags to hi tags with correct attributes.
[ ] Change tb tags to milestone tags.
[ ] Fix multiple spaces in a row
[ ] Verify all paragraphs start with p-tag, also those starting with a tag.

TEI header

[ ] Add TEI header.
[ ] Fill in details in TEI header
[ ] Verify Author dates and add to TEI header.
[ ] Document on-line scan sources.
[ ] Fill in description in noteStmt.
[ ] Fill in keywords / Subjects
[ ] Add auto-generated colophon divGen tag.
[ ] Fill in reference to LOC record (http://catalog.loc.gov/).
[ ] Fill in reference to OpenLibrary record (http://openlibrary.org).
[ ] Fill in reference to WorldCat record (source and work) (http://www.worldcat.org).
[ ] Generate unique epub-id. (http://www.guidgenerator.com/)

Verse

[ ] Tag all verse.
[ ] Apply proper indentation: rend=&ldquo;indent(2)&rdquo;

Lists

[ ] Tag all lists.

Tables

[ ] Format tables
[ ] Apply ditto-tags.

Table of Contents

[ ] Format table(s) of contents
[ ] Link entries in table of contents
[ ] Verify each link
[ ] Compare with generated table of contents

Images

[ ] Include all illustrations
[ ] Verify positioning of images makes sense.

Spelling

[ ] Verify generated wordlist
[ ] Tag language usage

Tools

[ ] Verify Gutcheck
[ ] Verify jeebees

Miscellany

[X] Check for [Greek: ...] notation
[ ] Curlify quotes
[ ] Check for wrong quotes
[ ] Disambiguate single quotes, apostrophes, and primes.
[ ] Unwrap lines
[ ] Check for lines not unwrapped
[ ] Verify sequence of page-numbers
[ ] Handle fractions, such as 1/2.  ([0-9])\&ndash;([0-9])/([0-9]) becomes \1\&frac\2\3;
[ ] Converted all fragments in uppercase to mixed case.

Text Version

[ ] Remove FIGURE notations
[ ] Verify empty lines between chapter headings
[ ] Verify empty lines around poetry and lists
[ ] Center poetry
[ ] Format title page
[ ] Remove Ads
[ ] Format Tables
[ ] Verify Greek and other transliterations

Additional Checks and Edits (Add as needed for a specific book)

[ ] ....

Post-Posting

[ ] Update status to 1.0 (i.e. Posted).
[ ] Include PG number and posting date in metadata

-->
